Gimli was the son of Glóin and a nephew of Óin, both former companions of Bilbo Baggins. He was a remote descendant of Durin the Deathless, father of the first house of dwarven people. Gimli stemmed from, but was not an inheritor of, the royal line. Through his father, Gimli was also the first cousin once removed (or "nephew", for simplicity's sake) of Balin, Lord of Moria, and his brother Dwalin, two more former companions of Bilbo. It is also stated in the Unfinished Tales that Gimli was prevented from traveling with his father on The Quest of Erebor because Thorin and company thought him too young, though Gimli, being in his sixties, considered himself ripe for adventure and was disappointed to be left behind.[1]

    "Faithless is he that says farewell when the road darkens." 
    —Gimli 

Involvement with the Ring
Gimli planGimli without a helmet
MoodyrocksAdded by Moodyrocks

When the one ring was taken to Rivendell, fate had brought Gimli, with his father, Gloin, to Rivendell to seek the advice of Elrond. As a result, they were summoned to the Council of Elrond, where Elrond believed they would find the answers to their questions and would be able to contribute. Whilst there, Gimli volunteered to accompany the Fellowship to Mordor to destroy the One Ring.


Gimli1Gimli played by John Rhys-Davies.
Norn GuyAdded by Norn Guy

He later volunteered to join the company at least in part because Legolas had just volunteered and he doubted the elf's intentions. Gimli journeyed with the fellowship southward along the Misty Mountains. Tolkien made it clear that Gloin and Gimli were fearful of Balin's fate, since communication had been cut off for five years. While in Moria, Gimli discovers Balin's tomb. After Gandalf's "Death", the Fellowship entered the Woods of Lothlórien, thus making Gimli the first dwarf to enter the Realm since the balrog was awakened in Moria. He was given a strand of Galadriel's hair, though when he asked for one, he was given three, which would lead to his name in later years of "Lockbearer", given to him by Galadriel. When the Fellowship of the Ring fractured, Gimli accompanied Aragorn and Legolas in pursuit of Meriadoc Brandybuck and Peregrin Took, who had been captured by the forces of Isengard.
Gimli at the siege of moriaGimli
CraigmbowringAdded by Craigmbowring

Eventually the three were reunited with Gandalf, and became more involved with the war. Gimli played a critical role in the defeat of the forces of Isengard at Helms Deep, where he was separated from Aragorn and Legolas and driven into the caves which he would later become Lord of. He fought his way out alongside Eomer when the forces of Isengard were driven from Helm's Deep. His skill with an axe led to his winning, by one orc, the friendly contest he and Legolas held over who could kill the most orcs, despite starting with a disadvantage. Gimli then accompanied Aragorn and Legolas through the Dimholt in an attempt to recruit the Army of the Dead. Upon freeing Gondor’s soldiers and capturing the Corsair's ships, the forces under Aragorn, including Gimli, sailed to Minas Tirith. After being victorious at the Battle of the Pelennor Fields, Gimli accompanied Aragorn and the Remainder of the Gondorian and Rohan armies to the Black gates.

    "To Gimli son of Gloin, give his Lady's greeting. Lockbearer, wherever thou goest my thought goes with thee. But have a care to lay thine axe to the right tree!" 
    —Galadriel's message to Gimli 

Life after the War
Bakshi GimliGimli as seen in the animated version.
GimliAdded by Gimli

After the War, Gimli led a large number of Durin's Folk south to establish a new Dwarf kingdom in the Glittering Caves, which were located behind Helm's Deep where Gimli was trapped during the battle, and he became the first Lord of the Glittering Caves. The Dwarves of the Glittering Caves, led by their Lord Gimli, would repair much of the physical damage that was incurred during the War of the Ring. Most notably, they rebuilt the Great Gate of Minas Tirith with a new one made of Mithril and steel, as well as improving upon the existing layout of the entire city.

Gimli was 139 years old (born in 2879 of the Third Age) when the Fellowship of the Ring set out from Rivendell, making him 52 years older than Aragorn. His date of death is not known, and according to the Red Book of Westmarch, he is said to have traveled with Legolas into the West , thus becoming the first dwarf to visit the Undying Lands. Of this possibility, Tolkien wrote that it would be strange indeed, that any Dwarf should be willing to leave Middle-earth for any love, or that the Eldar should receive him, or that the Lords of the West should permit it, but that it is said that Gimli went not only because of his great friendship with Legolas, but also out of desire to see again the beauty of Galadriel; and that she, being mighty among the Eldar, may have obtained this grace for him.[2][3]
Weapons
Gimli-axesMovie axes used by Gimli.
TheringAdded by Thering
In the books Gimli uses one single axe. In Ralph Bakshi's ill-fated animation film he follows the books description, while in the trilogy by Peter Jackson, Gimli was known for his skill with the Axe, and during the War of the Ring he wielded five different types of axes.

    A bearded axe
    Two throwing axes
    A walking axe
    A battle axe
    Double-Blade Axe 

Melee Axes
GimliGimli with 2 of his axes from the movie.
KingAragornAdded by KingAragorn

Like most Dwarves, Gimli favoured the axe and carried an assortment of variations of the weapon throughout his travels. At the beginning of his journey, Gimil was already equipped with a long handled axe which doubled as a walking stick, to ease the strain of long open walks through the vast open grasslands of Middle Earth, which was a value to the heavy clad Dwarf. As with most Dwarven Axes, the staff was square edged, with tightly wrapped double-cross leather strapping, which kept the axe from slipping through his grasp. The length of this staff gave Gimli's axe a much longer reach, which combined with his great strength, enabled him to hack into enemies at a three foot distance. 
Gimli With AxeGimli fighting in Parth Galen
GimliAdded by Gimli
During the Fellowship's travels through Moria, Gimli was able to retrieve a double bladed battle axe which apparently belonged to his father's cousin Balin, Lord of Moria, who had perished during the Goblin and Orc attack on Dwarrowdelf. Being double bladed, it allowed Gimli to swing it in both directions, without any need to constantly change the angle or grip. But it was much heavier, with a shorter staff, which meant it was more suited to close combat, but was compensated by its great striking power. He is never seen using it during the Return of the King film, as it remains pinned to his cloak. Gimli used all the axes mentioned above throughout the War of the Ring. He used them depending on the battlefield conditions and the types of enemies that he would have to face. No matter what axe, however, Gimli used them all with devastating power in every battle he faced, working in perfect conjunction with Aragorn's swordplay and Legolas's bow skill.
Throwing Axes

In addition to his melee weapons, Gimli utilized several throwing axes for his ranged attack. These axes, though obviously not the ones with the most range, could effectively kill whatever they were thrown at (with the exception of large, heavily armored enemies like trolls); however, he rarely uses them in the films. In the movies, Gimli threw an axe at the cave troll and at Gandalf in Fangorn Forest. He also throws one at an Uruk at beginning of the battle of Amon Hen. It is apparent that he prefers engaging in direct combat rather than using his throwing axes. Only on the PlayStation 2, Xbox and GameCube platforms of the Two Towers Gimli has 25 throwing axes and Gimli has 30 throwing axes in The Return of the King video game on the same above mentioned platforms as well as Mac and PC. This game also came out on the Gameboy Advance. Throwing axes however makes this function different in the Two Towers and The Return of the King on the Gameboy Advance it is available but to perform this function at the cost of certain points to do this certain ability. Though they can effectively damage/kill enemies when charged, they are actually the weakest among Gimli's ranged attacks unlike the ranged attacks of Aragorn and Legolas. Still, they do have potency up to some extent.[4]
Portrayal in adaptations
The Lord of the Rings film trilogy

In the Peter Jackson adaptation, Gimli accompanies his father, Gloin, and a deputation of dwarves who have been summoned to the Council of Elrond to discuss the fate of the One Ring. In this adaptation, he attempts to destroy the ring by hitting it with his axe, but the axe breaks on the ring, which is itself unblemished by the encounter. He later volunteers to join the company at least in part because Legolas had just volunteered and he doubted the elf's intentions. In the Peter Jackson adaptation, it was his idea to travel through the mines of Moria, though in the books it is Gandalf's.
Ralph Bakshi version

Gimli was shown as a bald-headed dwarf and was voiced by David Buck.
Voice Dubbing actors



r great disappointment it was empty: she did not like to drop the jar for fear of killing somebody, so managed to put it into one of the cupboards as she fell past it.

`Well!' thought Alice to herself, `after such a fall as this, I shall think nothing of tumbling down stairs! How brave they'll all think me at home! Why, I wouldn't say anything about it, even if I fell off the top of the house!' (Which was very likely true.)

Down, down, down. Would the fall never come to an end! `I wonder how many miles I've fallen by this time?' she said aloud. `I must be getting somewhere near the centre of the earth. Let me see: that would be four thousand miles down , I think--' (for, you see, Alice had learnt several things of this sort in her lessons in the schoolroom, and though this was not a very good opportunity for showing off her knowledge, as there was no one to listen to her, still it was good practice to say it over) `--yes, that's about the right distance--but then I wonder what Latitude or Longitude I've got to?' (Alice had no idea what Latitude was, or Longitude either, but thought they were nice grand words to say .)

Presently she began again. `I wonder if I shall fall right through the earth! How funny it'll seem to come out among the people that walk with their heads downward! The Antipathies, I think--' (she was rather glad there was no one listening, this time, as it didn't sound at all the right word) `--but I shall have to ask them what the name of the country is, you know. Please, Ma' am, is this New Zealand or Australia?' (and she tried to curtsey as she spoke-- fancy curtseying as you're falling through the air! Do you think you could manage it?) `And what an ignorant little girl she'll think me for asking! No, it'll never do to ask: perhaps I shall see it written up somewhere.'

Down, down, down. There was nothing else to do, so Alice soon began talking again. `Dinah'll miss me very much to-night, I should think!' (Dinah was the cat .) `I hope they'll remember her saucer of milk at tea-time. Dinah my dear! I wish you were down here with me! There are no mice in the air, I'm afraid, but you might catch a bat, and that's very like a mouse, you know. But do cats eat bats, I wonder?' And here Alice began to get rather sleepy, and went on saying to herself, in a dreamy sort of way, `Do cats eat bats? Do cats eat bats?' and sometimes, `Do bats eat cats?' for, you see, as she couldn't answer either question, it didn't much matter which way she put it. She felt that she was dozing off, and had just begun to dream that she was walking hand in hand with Dinah, and saying to her very earnestly, `Now, Dinah, tell me the truth: did you ever eat a bat?' when suddenly, thump! thump! down she came upon a heap of sticks and dry leaves, and the fall was over.

Alice was not a bit hurt, and she jumped up on to her feet in a moment: she looked up, but it was all dark overhead; before her was another long passage, and the White Rabbit was still in sight, hurrying down it. There was not a moment to be lost: away went Alice like the wind, and was just in time to hear it say, as it turned a corner, `Oh my ears and whiskers, how late it's getting!' She was close behind it when she turned the corner, but the Rabbit was no longer to be seen: she found herself in a long, low hall, which was lit up by a row of lamps hanging from the roof.

There were doors all round the hall, but they were all locked; and when Alice had been all the way down one side and up the other, trying every door, she walked sadly down the middle, wondering how she was ever to get out again.

Suddenly she came upon a little three-legged table, all made of solid glass; there was nothing on it except a tiny golden key, and Alice's first thought was that it might belong to one of the doors of the hall; but, alas! either the locks were too large, or the key was too small, but at any rate it would not open any of them. However, on the second time round, she came upon a low curtain she had not noticed before, and behind it was a little door about fifteen inches high: she tried the little golden key in the lock, and to her great delight it fitted!

Alice opened the door and found that it led into a small passage, not much larger than a rat-hole: she knelt down and looked along the passage into the loveliest garden you ever saw. How she longed to get out of that dark hall, and wander about among those beds of bright flowers and those cool fountains, but she could not even get her head though the doorway; `and even if my head would go through,' thought poor Alice, `it would be of very little use without my shoulders. Oh, how I wish I could shut up like a telescope! I think I could, if I only know how to begin.' For, you see, so many out-of-the-way things had happened lately, that Alice had begun to think that very few things indeed were really impossible.

There seemed to be no use in waiting by the little door, so she went back to the table, half hoping she might find another key on it, or at any rate a book of rules for shutting people up like telescopes: this time she found a little bottle on it, (`which certainly was not here before,' said Alice,) and round the neck of the bottle was a paper label, with the words `DRINK ME' beautifully printed on it in large letters.

It was all very well to say `Drink me,' but the wise little Alice was not going to do that in a hurry. `No, I'll look first,' she said, `and see whether it's marked "poison" or not'; for she had read several nice little histories about children who had got burnt, and eaten up by wild beasts and other unpleasant things, all because they would not remember the simple rules their friends had taught them: such as, that a red-hot poker will burn you if you hold it too long; and that if you cut your finger very deeply with a knife, it usually bleeds; and she had never forgotten that, if you drink much from a bottle marked `poison,' it is almost certain to disagree with you, sooner or later.

However, this bottle was NOT marked `poison,' so Alice ventured to taste it, and finding it very nice, (it had, in fact, a sort of mixed flavour of cherry- tart, custard, pine-apple, roast turkey, toffee, and hot buttered toast,) she very soon finished it off.


`What a curious feeling!' said Alice; `I must be shutting up like a telescope .'

And so it was indeed: she was now only ten inches high, and her face brightened up at the thought that she was now the right size for going though the little door into that lovely garden. First, however, she waited for a few minutes to see if she was going to shrink any further: she felt a little nervous about this; `for it might end, you know,' said Alice to herself, `in my going out altogether, like a candle. I wonder what I should be like then?' And she tried to fancy what the flame of a candle is like after the candle is blown out, for she could not remember ever having seen such a thing.

After a while, finding that nothing more happened, she decided on going into the garden at once; but, alas for poor Alice! when she got to the door, she found he had forgotten the little golden key, and when she went back to the table for it, she found she could not possibly reach it: she could see it quite plainly through the glass, and she tried her best to climb up one of the legs of the table, but it was too slippery; and when she had tired herself out with trying, the poor little thing sat down and cried.

`Come, there's no use in crying like that!' said Alice to herself, rather sharply; `I advise you to leave off this minute!' She generally gave herself very good advice, (though she very seldom followed it), and sometimes she scolded herself so severely as to bring tears into her eyes; and once she remembered trying to box her own ears for having cheated herself in a game of croquet she was playing against herself, for this curious child was very fond of pretending to be two people. `But it's no use now,' thought poor Alice, `to pretend to be two people! Why, there's hardly enough of me left to make ONE respectable person!'

Soon her eye fell on a little glass box that was lying under the table: she opened it, and found in it a very small cake, on which the words `EAT ME' were beautifully marked in currants. `Well, I'll eat it,' said Alice, `and if it makes me grow larger, I can reach the key; and if it makes me grow smaller, I can creep under the door; so either way I'll get into the garden, and I don't care which happens!'

She ate a little bit, and said anxiously to herself, `Which way? Which way?', holding her hand on the top of her head to feel which way it was growing, and she was quite surprised to find that she remained the same size: to be sure, this generally happens when one eats cake, but Alice had got so much into the way of expecting nothing but out-of-the-way things to happen, that it seemed quite dull and stupid for life to go on in the common way.

So she set to work, and very soon finished off the cake. 



(Reuters) - An Irishman accused of a bombing that killed four soldiers on horseback in London in 1982 walked free on Tuesday after it emerged at his trial that Northern Irish police had given him a false assurance that he would not be prosecuted.

John Downey, 62, from County Donegal in Ireland, was charged with murdering four members of the Royal Household Cavalry who were killed when a car bomb exploded in Hyde Park as they paraded towards Buckingham Palace. He denied the charges.

Another 23 soldiers from the Household Cavalry, the Queen's official bodyguard, which carries out ceremonial duties on state occasions, were wounded by shrapnel.

Later on the same day, July 20, a second bomb exploded under a bandstand in London's Regent's Park during a performance by the Royal Green Jackets military band, killing seven members.

The Irish Republican Army claimed responsibility for the double bombing, one of its most devastating attacks on the British mainland during the IRA's guerrilla campaign to drive British forces out of the province of Northern Ireland.

Downey's defence had maintained that the trial should not go ahead because he had received a letter of assurance from the Northern Ireland Office in 2007 that he was not wanted in London in connection with the bombing.

"There are no warrants in existence, nor are you wanted in Northern Ireland for arrest, questioning or charging by police. The Police Service of Northern Ireland are not aware of any interest in you by any other police force," the letter said.

But that assurance was hollow, defence lawyers said. London police had never lost interest in arresting Downey and last May they detained him at Gatwick Airport en route to Greece.

The presiding judge in the Old Bailey court hearing Downey's case ruled that the false assurance was a "catastrophic failure" that misled the defendant and a trial would be an abuse of executive power.

The families of those killed said the judgment had left them feeling "great sadness and bitter disappointment".

"This news has left us all feeling devastatingly left down, even more so when the monumental blunder behind this judgement lies at the feet of the Police Service of Northern Ireland," they said in a statement carried by the BBC.

The former Chief Constable of Northern Ireland, Hugh Orde, apologised to the families for "erroneous information being sent to Mr Downey by the Northern Ireland Office and thus prejudicing the current indictment".

London's Metropolitan Police said the case remained open and any more information coming to light would be investigated.

A 1998 peace deal largely ended more than three decades of violence in which more than 3,500 people were killed. The IRA later disbanded, but dissident groups continue to carry out sporadic gun and bomb attacks in Northern Ireland.

The case against John Downey, 62, collapsed after a senior judge heard the defendant was among the alleged terrorists who had received a letter protecting them from prosecution.

Downey got the document from officials in 2007 as a result of a “reckless” error by the Police Service of Northern Ireland.

The letter should not have been sent because he was on the Police National Computer as being wanted for murder by the Met.

He was arrested last year and charged with the murder of four members of the Household Cavalry who were killed when a bomb tore through the park in West London.

After the case collapsed, relatives of the victims said in a statement: “This news has left us feeling devastatingly let down, even more so when the monumental blunder behind this judgement lies at the feet of the Police Service of Northern Ireland.”

In a scathing ruling, Mr Justice Sweeney stopped the case and told the Old Bailey there was “no sensible explanation” given for the failures.

He added that the public interest in continuing with the prosecution was “significantly outweighed” by the public interest in ensuring that promises made by state officials were honoured.

He made the ruling on Friday but it could not be reported until yesterday when the prosecution decided against appealing.

nationwide. Protesters in the street “are a violent minority. The vast majority of Venezuelans including many opponents of the revolution want peace,” he said.

Maduro has called on a cross-section of Venezuelan society, including union workers, intellectuals, clergy, students and governors to come to Caracas tomorrow and sign an agreement condemning violence. Opposition leader Henrique Capriles, who skipped a meeting of regional governors with the president yesterday, is evaluating the invitation, his spokeswoman Ana Maria Fernandez said in a text message today.
Story: What the Heck Is Going on in Venezuela? (Could the Maduro Regime Fall?)

Demonstrators protesting shortages of basic goods, the world’s fastest inflation and rising crime have confronted armed pro-government groups and National Guard troops nightly in Caracas since Feb. 12. Panama President Ricardo Martinelli, who Maduro says opposes his government, today said he asked the Organization of American States to hold a meeting of foreign ministers on the Venezuelan crisis.

Tear gas was fired tonight in the Caracas neighborhood of Altamira Sur, the center of demonstrations, Mayor Ramon Muchacho said in a post on his Twitter account.

While saying opposition groups are free to protest, Maduro has also accused them of conducting a slow-motion coup d’etat. Capriles pulled out of yesterday’s talks while demanding the government free opposition leader Leopoldo Lopez, who was imprisoned last week on charges of inciting violence. 

Paleo-indians migrated from Asia to what is now the U.S. mainland around 15,000 years ago,[13] with European colonization beginning in the 16th century. The United States emerged from 13 British colonies located along the Atlantic seaboard. Disputes between Great Britain and these colonies led to the American Revolution. On July 4, 1776, delegates from the 13 colonies unanimously issued the Declaration of Independence. The ensuing war ended in 1783 with the recognition of independence of the United States from the Kingdom of Great Britain, and was the first successful war of independence against a European colonial empire.[14][15] The current Constitution was adopted on September 17, 1787. The first 10 amendments, collectively named the Bill of Rights, were ratified in 1791 and guarantee many fundamental civil rights and freedoms.

Driven by the doctrine of manifest destiny, the United States embarked on a vigorous expansion across North America throughout the 19th century.[16] This involved displacing native tribes, acquiring new territories, and gradually admitting new states.[16] The American Civil War ended legal slavery in the country.[17] By the end of the 19th century, the United States extended into the Pacific Ocean,[18] and its economy was the world's largest.[19] The Spanish–American War and World War I confirmed the country's status as a global military power. The United States emerged from World War II as a global superpower, the first country with nuclear weapons, and a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. The end of the Cold War and the dissolution of the Soviet Union left the United States as the sole superpower.

The United States is a developed country and has the world's largest national economy, with an estimated 
GDP in 2013 of $16.7 trillion – 23% of global nominal GDP and 19% at purchasing-power parity.[6][20] 
The economy is fueled by an abundance of natural resources and the world's highest worker productivity,[21] with per capita GDP being the world's sixth-highest in 2010.[6] While the U.S. economy is considered post-industrial, it continues to be one of the world's largest manufacturers.[22] The U.S. has the highest mean and second-highest median household income in the OECD as well as the highest average wage,[23][24] though it has the fourth most unequal income distribution among OECD nations[25][26] with roughly 16% of the population living in poverty.[27] The country accounts for 39% of global military spending,[28] being the world's foremost economic and military power, a prominent political and cultural force, and a leader in scientific research
Jules Winnfield (in Brad and Marvins Appartment)

Ezekiel 25:17."The path of the righteous man is beset on all sides by the inequities of the selfish and the tyranny of evil men. Blessed is he who, in the name of charity and good will, shepherds the weak through the valley of darkness, for he is truly his brother's keeper and the finder of lost children. And I will strike down upon thee with great vengeance and furious anger those who attempt to poison and destroy my brothers. And you will know my name is the Lord when I lay my vengeance upon thee."
Jules Winnfield (in the diner)

Ezekiel 25:17."The path of the righteous man is beset on all sides by the inequities of the selfish and the tyranny of evil men. Blessed is he who, in the name of charity and good will, shepherds the weak through the valley of darkness, for he is truly his brother's keeper and the finder of lost children. And I will strike down upon thee with great vengeance and furious anger those who attempt to poison and destroy my brothers. And you will know I am the Lord when I lay my vengeance upon you." I been saying that shit for years. And if you heard it, that meant your ass. I never gave much thought to what it meant. I just thought it was some cold-blooded shit to say to a motherfucker before I popped a cap in his ass. But I saw some shit this morning made me think twice. See, now I'm thinking, maybe it means you're the evil man, and I'm the righteous man, and Mr. 9 millimeter here, he's the shepherd protecting my righteous ass in the valley of darkness. Or it could mean you're the righteous man and I'm the shepherd and it's the world that's evil and selfish. I'd like that. But that shit ain't the truth. The truth is, you're the weak, and I'm the tyranny of evil men. But I'm trying, Ringo. I'm trying real hard to be the shepherd."
Marsellus Wallace

    [to Butch] The night of the fight, you may feel a slight sting. That's pride fucking with you. Fuck pride. Pride only hurts. It never helps. You fight through that shit.

    [to Butch] This business is filled to the brim with unrealistic motherfuckers. Motherfuckers who think their ass will age like wine. If you mean it turns to vinegar...it does. If you mean it gets better with age...it don't.

Captain Koons

    [To young Butch] Hello, little man. Boy, I sure heard a bunch about you. See, I was a good friend of your dad's. We were in that Hanoi pit of hell together over five years. Hopefully, you'll never have to experience this yourself, but when two men are in a situation like me and your dad were for as long as we were, you take on certain responsibilities of the other. If it'd been me who'd - not made it, Major Coolidge'd be talking right now to my son Jim. But the way it turned out, I'm talking to you. Butch. I got somethin' for ya. This watch I got here was first purchased by your great-grandfather during the first World War. It was bought in a little general store in Knoxville, Tennessee,. Made by the first company to ever make wrist watches. Up 'til then, people just carried pocket watches. It was bought by Private Doughboy Erine Coolidge on the day he set sail for Paris. This was your great-grandfather's war watch and he wore it everyday he was in that war, and when he'd done his duty, he went home to your great-grandmother, took the watch off, put it in an old coffee can, and in that can it stayed until your granddad, Dane Coolidge, was called upon by his country to go overseas and fight the Germans once again. This time they called it World War II.

    Your great-grandfather gave this watch to your granddad for good luck. Unfortunately, Dane's luck wasn't as good as his old man's. Dane was a Marine and he was killed -- along with all the other Marines at the battle of Wake Island. Your granddad was facing death. He knew it. None of those boys had any illusions about ever leavin' that island alive, so three days before the Japanese took the island, your granddad asked a gunner on an Air Force transport, name of Winocki - a man he had never met before in his life - to deliver to his infant son who he'd never seen in the flesh, his gold watch. Three days later, your granddad was dead, but Winocki kept his word. After the war was over, he paid a visit to your grandmother, delivering to your infant father his dad's gold watch. This watch. [He holds the watch up] This watch was on your daddy's wrist when he was shot down over Hanoi. He was captured, put in a Vietnamese prison camp. He knew that if the gooks ever saw the watch, it'd be confiscated and taken away. The way your Dad looked at it, this watch was your birthright. He'd be damned if any slope's gonna put their greasy, yellow hands on his boy's birthright, so he hid it in one place he knew he could hide something - his ass. Five long years he wore this watch up his ass. Then, he died of dysentery. He give me the watch. I hid this uncomfortable hunk of metal up my ass two years. Then, after seven years, I was sent home to my family. Now, little man, I give the watch to you.

Dialogue

    Yolanda: This place? A coffee shop?
    Ringo: What's wrong with that? Nobody ever robs restaurants. Why not? Bars, liquor stores, gas stations; you get your head blown off sticking up one of them. Restaurants, on the other hand, you catch with their pants down. They're not expecting to get robbed. Not as expectant, anyway.
    Yolanda: I bet you could cut down on the hero factor in a place like this.
    Ringo: Correct. Just like banks, these places are insured. Manager? He don't give a fuck. He's just trying to get you out the door before you start plugging the diners. Waitresses? Fucking forget it. No way are they taking a bullet for the register. Busboy, some wetback getting paid a dollar fifty an hour, really give a fuck you're stealing from the owner? Customers are sitting there with food in their mouths; they don't know what's going on. One minute they're having a Denver omelette; the next minute, someone's sticking a gun in their face.

    Jules Winnfield: Okay, so, tell me about the hash bars.
    Vincent Vega: So what you want to know?
    Jules: Well, hash is legal there, right?
    Vincent: Yeah, it's legal, but it ain't a hundred percent legal. I mean, you can't walk into a restaurant, roll a joint, and start puffin' away. They want you to smoke in your home or certain designated places.
    Jules: Those are hash bars?
    Vincent: Breaks down like this, okay: it's legal to buy it, it's legal to own it, and if you're the proprietor of a hash bar, it's legal to sell it. It's illegal to carry it, but that doesn't really matter 'cause, get a load of this, all right; if you get stopped by the cops in Amsterdam, it's illegal for them to search you. I mean, that's a right the cops in Amsterdam don't have.
    Jules: [laughing] Oh, man. I'm going, that's all there is to it. I'm fucking going.
    Vincent: Yeah, baby, you'd dig it the most. But you know what the funniest thing about Europe is?
    Jules: What?
    Vincent: It's the little differences. I mean, they got the same shit over there that we got here, but it's just...it's just, there it's a little different.
    Jules: Example?
    Vincent: All right. Well, you can walk into a movie theater in Amsterdam and buy a beer. And I don't mean just like in no paper cup; I'm talking about a glass of beer. And in Paris, you can buy a beer at McDonald's. And you know what they call a Quarter Pounder with Cheese in Paris?
    Jules: They don't call it a Quarter Pounder with Cheese?
    Vincent: Nah, man, they got the metric system. They wouldn't know what the fuck a Quarter Pounder is.
    Jules: What do they call it?
    Vincent: They call it a "Royale with Cheese."
    Jules: "Royale with Cheese."
    Vincent: That's right.
    Jules: What do they call a Big Mac?
    Vincent: A Big Mac's a Big Mac, but they call it "Le Big Mac."
    Jules: [in mock French accent] "Le Big Mac." [laughs] What do they call a Whopper?
    Vincent: I don't know, I didn't go in a Burger King.

    Vincent: [about a foot massage] It's layin' your hands in a familiar way on Marsellus' new wife. I mean, is it as bad as eatin' her pussy out? No, but it's the same fuckin' ballpark.
    Jules: Whoa, whoa, whoa. Stop right there. Eating a bitch out and giving a bitch a foot massage ain't even the same fucking thing.
    Vincent: It's not. It's the same ballpark.
    Jules: Ain't no fucking ballpark neither. Now, look, maybe your method of massage differs from mine, but, you know, touching his wife's feet and sticking your tongue in the holiest of holies ain't the same fucking ballpark. It ain't the same league. It ain't even the same fucking sport. Look, foot massages don't mean shit.
    Vincent: Have you ever given a foot massage?
    Jules: Don't be telling me about foot massages, I'm the foot fuckin' master.
    Vincent: Given a lot of them?
    Jules: Shit, yeah. I got my technique down and everything, I don't be tickling or nothing.
    Vincent: Would you give a guy a foot massage?
    Jules: [pause] Fuck you.
    Vincent: You give them a lot?
    Jules: Fuck you.
    Vincent: You know, I'm getting kinda tired, I could use a foot massage myself.
    Jules: Yo, yo, yo, man, you best back off. I'm getting pissed here. This is the door.
    Vincent: There it is.
    Jules: What time you got?
    Vincent: [looks at his watch] 7:22 in the a.m.
    Jules: No, it's not time yet. Let's hang back. [they go into an empty hallway] Look, just 'cause I wouldn't give no man a foot massage don't make it right for Marsellus to throw Antoine into a glass motherfucking house, fucking up the way the nigga talks. That shit ain't right. Motherfucker do that shit to me, he better paralyze my ass because I'd kill the motherfucker. Know what I'm saying?
    Vincent: I ain't saying it's right. But you're saying a foot massage don't mean nothing, and I'm saying it does. Now, look, I've given a million ladies a million foot massages, and they all meant something. We act like they don't, but they do, and that's what's so fucking cool about them. There's a sensuous thing going on where you don't talk about it, but you know it, she knows it, fucking Marsellus knew it, and Antoine should have fucking better known better. I mean, that's his fucking wife, man. He ain't gonna have no sense of humor about that shit. You know what I'm saying?
    Jules: That's an interesting point. [pause] C'mon, let's get into character.

    Jules: Looks like me and Vincent caught you boys at breakfast. Sorry about that Whatcha having?
    Brett: Uh, hamburgers.
    Jules: Hamburgers! The cornerstone of any nutritious breakfast. What kind of hamburgers.
    Brett: Uh, Ch-cheeseburgers.
    Jules: No, where'd you get them? McDonald's, Wendy's, Jack in the Box, WHERE?
    Brett: Um, Big Kahuna Burgers.
    Jules: Big Kahuna Burgers! That's that Hawaiian burger joint. I hear they've got some tasty burgers. I ain't never had one myself, how are they?
    Brett: Good
    Jules: You mind if I try one of yours? This is yours here, right?
    Brett: Yeah.
    [Jules takes a bite of the Hamburger]
    Jules: Mmm, this is a tasty burger! Vincent, you ever had a Big Kahuna Burger? (Vincent shakes his head) Want a bite, they're real tasty.
    Vincent: Ain't hungry.
    Jules: Well, if you like burgers, give them a try sometime. Me, I can't usually get 'em because my girlfriend's a vegetarian, which, pretty much makes me a vegetarian. I do love the taste of a good burger. (turns to Brett) You know what they call a Quarter Pounder with cheese in France?
    Brett: Um, no.
    Jules: Tell 'em, Vincent.
    Vincent: Royale with cheese.
    Jules: "Royale with cheese." Know why they call it that?
    Brett: Uh, because of the the metric system?
    Jules: (smiles at Brett) Check out the big brain on Brett! You're a smart motherfucker. That's right, the metric system.

    Brett: [to Jules] Look, I'm sorry, I-I didn't get your name. I got yours, uh, Vincent, right? But-But I-I never got your...
    Jules: My name is Pitt, and your ass ain't talking your way outta this shit.
    Brett: [rising] No, no, no. I just want you to know how – [Jules motions him to sit down] I just want you to know how sorry we are that-that things got so fucked up with us and-and Mr. Wallace. I-I-It...we-we got into this thing with the best intentions. Really. I never...
    [Jules shoots Flock-of-Seagulls, Brett recoils in horror]
    Jules: Oh, I'm sorry. Did I break your concentration? I didn't mean to do that. Please, continue. You were sayin' something about "best intentions"? [silence] What's the matter? Oh, y-you were finished? Oh, well, allow me to retort. What does Marsellus Wallace look like?
    Brett: What?
    Jules: [overturns the small table in the room] What country are you from?!
    Brett: What?
    Jules: "What" ain't no country I ever heard of! They speak English in "What"?!
    Brett: What?
    Jules: English, motherfucker! Do you speak it?!
    Brett: Yes.
    Jules: Then you know what I'm saying.
    Brett: Yes.
    Jules: Describe what Marsellus Wallace looks like.
    Brett: What...?
    Jules: [points gun directly in Brett's face] Say "what" again! Say! "what"! again! I dare you! I double-dare you, motherfucker! Say "what" one more goddamn time!
    Brett: He-he's black.
    Jules: Go on.
    Brett: He's bald.
    Jules: Does he look like a bitch?
    Brett: What?
    Jules: [shoots Brett in the shoulder; Brett screams] DOES...HE...LOOK...LIKE...A BITCH?!
    Brett: [in pain] No!
    Jules: Then why'd you try to fuck him like a bitch, Brett?
    Brett: [faintly] I didn't.
    Jules: Yes, you did. Yes, you did, Brett. You tried to fuck him. And Marsellus Wallace don't like to be fucked by anybody except Mrs. Wallace. You read the Bible, Brett?
    Brett: [gasping for breath] Yes.
    Jules: Well, there's this passage I've got memorized, sorta fits the occasion. Ezekiel 25:17? "The path of the righteous man is beset on all sides by the iniquities of the selfish and the tyranny of evil men. Blessed is he who in the name of charity and good will shepherds the weak through the valley of darkness, for he is truly his brother's keeper and the finder of lost children. [begins pacing about the room] And I will strike down upon thee with great vengeance and furious anger those who attempt to poison and destroy my brothers. And you will know my name is the Lord... [pulls out his gun and aims it at Brett] ...when I lay my vengeance upon thee."
    [Brett shrieks in horror as Jules and Vincent shoot him repeatedly]
    Marvin: Oh fuck I'm fucked oh fuck oh fuck.
    Vincent: Is he a friend of yours?
    Jules: Hmm? Oh, Vincent, Marvin. Marvin, Vincent.
    Vincent: Better tell him to shut the fuck up he's getting on my nerves.
    Jules: Marvin. Marvin. Marvin! I'd knock that shit off if I was you.


    Vincent: You ever seen that show "Cops"? I was watching it one time and there was this cop on, and he was talking about this gun fight he had in the hallway with this guy, right and he just unloaded on this guy and nothing happened, he didn't hit nothing. Okay it was just him and this guy. I mean you know, it's freaky but it happens.
    Jules: Look you want to play blind man, go walk with the shepherd, but me - my eyes are wide fucking open.
    Vincent: The fuck does that mean?
    Jules: I mean that's it for me, from here on in you consider my ass retired.
    Vincent: Jesus Christ...
    Jules: No blasphemy.
    Vincent: God damn it Jules...
    Jules: I said don't do that!
    Vincent: Hey, you know why the fuck you fucking freaking out on us?
    Jules: Look, I'm telling Marsellus today, I'm through.
    Vincent: But why don't you tell him at the same time, why?
    Jules: Don't worry I will.
    Vincent: Yeah, and I bet you ten thousand dollars he laughs his ass off.
    Jules: I don't give a damn if he does.
    Vincent: Marvin, what do you make of all this?
    Marvin: Man, I don't even have an opinion.
    Vincent: Well you got to have an opinion! I mean do you think that God came down from heaven and stopped the ... [Vincent's gun goes off]
    Jules: Oh! The fuck's happening?! Ah!
    Vincent: Oh shit!
    Jules: Man!
    Vincent: Oh, man, I shot Marvin in the face!
    Jules: What!? Why the fuck'd you do that?!
    Vincent: Well, I didn't mean to do it was an accident.
    Jules: Oh man, I seen some crazy ass shit in my time, but this...
    Vincent: Chill out man, I told you it was an accident, you probably went over a bump or something.
    Jules: Hey look, I did not hit no motherfucking bump.
    Vincent: Hey look man, I didn't mean to shoot the son of a bitch, the gun went off I don't know why.
    Jules: Well look at this fucking mess man! We're on a city street in broad day light here.
    Vincent: I don't believe it man!
    Jules: Well, believe it now MOTHERFUCKER, we got to get this car off the road! You know cops tend to notice shit like you're driving a car drenched in fucking blood!
    Vincent: Just take it to a friendly place that's all.
    Jules: This is the valley, Vincent. Marsellus ain't got no friendly places in the valley.
    Vincent: Well Jules this ain't my fucking town man!!
    Jules: Shit!
    Vincent: What you doing?
    Jules: Calling my partner in Toluca Lake.
    Vincent: Wheres Toluca Lake?
    Jules: Just over the hill here, over by the Burbank studios. Look man, if Jimmie's ass ain't home I don't know what the fuck we going to do man, cause I don't got no other partners in 818. [over the telephone] Jimmie, yo', how you doing man, it's Jules. Just listen up man, me and my homeboy in some serious fucking shit, we're in a car we need to get off the road pronto, can we use your garage for a couple hours...


    Mia Wallace: Don't you hate that?
    Vincent: Hate what?
    Mia: Uncomfortable silences. Why do we feel it's necessary to yak about bullshit in order to be comfortable?
    Vincent: I don't know. That's a good question.
    Mia: That's when you know you've found somebody really special: you can just shut the fuck up for a minute and comfortably share silence.

    Mia Wallace: So, did you think of something to say?
    Vincent Vega: As a matter of fact, I did. However, you seem like a really nice person, and I don't want to offend you.
    Mia Wallace: Ooh! This doesn't sound like the usual mindless, boring, getting-to-know-you chit-chat. This sound like you have something to say.

    Butch: You okay?
    Marsellus: Nah, man. I'm pretty fucking far from okay.
    [Zed, who had just been shot by Marsellus, screams and moans in agony]
    Butch: What now?
    Marsellus: What now? Let me tell you what now. I'm gonna call a couple of hard, pipe-hitting niggas to go to work on the homes here with a pair of pliers and a blow torch. [to Zed] You hear me talking, hillbilly boy? I ain't through with you by a damn sight. I'm gonna get medieval on your ass.
    Butch: I meant, what now between me and you.
    Marsellus: Oh, that "what now." I tell you what now between me and you. There is no "me and you". Not no more.
    Butch: So we cool?
    Marsellus: Yeah, we cool. Two things: don't tell nobody about this. This shit is between me, you, and Mr. soon-to-be-living-the-rest-of-his-short-ass-life-in-agonizing-pain rapist here. It ain't nobody else's business. Two: you leave town tonight, right now, and when you gone, you stay gone, or you be gone. You lost all your LA privileges. Deal?
    Butch: Deal.
    Marsellus: Now get your ass out of here.

    Fabienne: Whose motorcycle is this?
    Butch: It's a chopper, baby.
    Fabienne: Whose chopper is this?
    Butch: It's Zed's.
    Fabienne: Who's Zed?
    Butch: Zed's dead, baby. Zed's dead.

    Jules: Mmm. Goddamn, Jimmie. This is some serious gourmet shit. Usually, me and Vince would be happy with some freeze-dried Taster's Choice, right? And he springs this serious gourmet shit on us. What flavor is this?
    Jimmie: Knock it off, Julie.
    Jules: What?
    Jimmie: I don't need you to tell me how fucking good my coffee is, okay? I'm the one who buys it, I know how good it is. When Bonnie goes shopping, she buys shit. Me, I buy the gourmet expensive stuff because when I drink it, I want to taste it. But you know what's on my mind right now? It ain't the coffee in my kitchen, it's the dead nigger in my garage.
    Jules: Oh, Jimmie, don't even worry about that.
    Jimmie: No, I wanna ask you a question. When you came pullin' in here, did you notice a sign out in front of my house that said "Dead Nigger Storage"?
    Jules: Jimmie, you know I ain't seen no...
    Jimmie: [shouting] Did you notice a sign out in front of my house that said "Dead Nigger Storage"?
    Jules: No, I didn't.
    Jimmie: [shouting] You know why you didn't see that sign?
    Jules: Why?
    Jimmie: [still shouting] 'Cause it ain't there, 'cause storing dead niggers ain't my fucking business, that's why.
    Jules: But Jimmie, we ain't gonna store the motherfucker.
    Jimmie: No, no, no, no, no, don't you fucking realize, man, that if Bonnie comes home and finds a dead body in her house, I'm gonna get divorced? All right? No marriage counseling, no trial separation, I'm going to get fucking divorced, okay? And I don't want to get fucking divorced. Now man, you know, fuck, I wanna help you, but I don't want to lose my wife doing it, all right?
    Jules: Jimmie, Jimmie, she ain't gonna leave you.
    Jimmie: Don't fucking "Jimmie" me, Jules, okay? Don't fucking "Jimmie" me. There's nothing that you're gonna say that's gonna make me forget that I love my wife, is there? Now look, you know, she comes home from work in about an hour and a half. Graveyard shift at the hospital. You gotta make some phone calls? You gotta call some people? Well, then do it. And then get the fuck out of my house before she gets here.
    Jules: Hey, that's Kool and the Gang. You know, we don't wanna fuck your shit up. All we wanna do is call my people and get them to bring us in, that's all.
    Jimmie: You don't wanna fuck my shit up? You're fucking up my shit right now. You're gonna fuck my shit up big time if Bonnie comes home. So just do me that favor, all right? The phone is in my bedroom, I suggest you get going.

    Marsellus: [calmly] Yeah, I grasp that, Jules. All I'm doing is contemplating the ifs.
    Jules: [nervous] I don't wanna hear 'bout no motherfucking ifs. All I wanna hear from your ass is, "You ain't got no problem, Jules, I'm on the motherfucker. Go back in there, chill them niggas out and wait for the cavalry, which should be coming directly".
    Marsellus: You ain't got no problem, Jules. I'm on the motherfucker. Go back in there and chill them niggas out and wait for The Wolf, who should be coming directly.
    Jules: [Jules pauses and becomes calm] You sending The Wolf?
    Marsellus: Oh, you feel better, motherfucker?
    Jules: [laughing] Shit, negro, that's all you had to say!

    Vincent: A "please" would be nice.
    The Wolf: Come again?
    Vincent: I said a "please" would be nice.
    The Wolf: Get it straight, Buster. I'm not here to say "please". I'm here to tell you what to do. And if self-preservation is an instinct you possess, you better fucking do it and do it quick. I'm here to help. If my help's not appreciated, lots of luck, gentlemen.
    Jules: No no, Mr. Wolfe, it's not like that. Your help is definitely appreciated.
    Vincent: Look, Mr. Wolfe, I respect you. I just don't like people barking orders at me, that's all.
    The Wolf: If I'm curt with you, it's because time is a factor. I think fast, I talk fast, and I need you two guys to act fast if you want to get out of this. So pretty please, with sugar on top, clean the fucking car.

    Jules: [while cleaning the bloodied car] Oh man, I will never forgive your ass for this shit. This is some fucked up repugnant shit.
    Vincent: Jules, did you ever hear the philosophy that once a man admits that he is wrong, that he is immediately forgiven for all wrongdoings? Have you ever heard that?
    Jules: Get the fuck outta my face with that shit. The motherfucker who said that shit never had to pick up itty bitty pieces of skull on the account of your dumb ass.
    Vincent: I got a threshold, Jules, I got a threshold for the abuse that I will take. And right now I’m a fucking race-car, alright, and you got me in the red. And I’m just saying, I’m just saying that it’s fucking dangerous to have a race-car in the fucking red, that’s all. I could blow.
    Jules: Oh, oh, you ready to blow?
    Vincent: Yeah, I’m ready to blow.
    Jules: Well I’m a mushroom cloud layin’ motherfucker, motherfucker. Every time my fingers touch brain, I’m "Superfly TNT". I’m "The Guns of the Navarone". In fact, what the fuck am I doing in the back? You the motherfucker should be on brain detail. We’re fucking switching. I’m washing the windows, and you picking up this nigga's skull.

    Vincent: Want some bacon?
    Jules: No, man. I don't eat pork.
    Vincent: Are you Jewish?
    Jules: Nah, I ain't Jewish, I just don't dig on swine, that's all.
    Vincent: Why not?
    Jules: Pigs are filthy animals. I don't eat filthy animals.
    Vincent: Yeah, but bacon tastes good. Pork chops taste good.
    Jules: Hey, sewer rat may taste like pumpkin pie, but I'd never know 'cause I wouldn't eat the filthy motherfucker. Pigs sleep and root in shit. That's a filthy animal. I ain't eatin' nothing that ain't got sense enough to disregard its own feces.
    Vincent: How about a dog? Dog eats its own feces.
    Jules: I don't eat dog either.
    Vincent: Yeah, but do you consider a dog to be a filthy animal?
    Jules: I wouldn't go so far as to call a dog filthy, but they're definitely dirty. But, a dog's got personality. Personality goes a long way.
    Vincent: Ah, so by that rationale, if a pig had a better personality, he would cease to be a filthy animal. Is that true?
    Jules: Well, we'd have to be talkin' about one charming motherfucking pig. I mean, he'd have to be ten times more charming than that Arnold on Green Acres, you know what I'm saying?
    Vincent: [laughing] That's good.

    Jules: Man, I just been sitting here thinking.
    Vincent: About what?
    Jules: About the miracle we just witnessed.
    Vincent: The miracle you witnessed. I witnessed a freak occurrence.
    Jules: What is a miracle, Vincent?
    Vincent: An act of God.
    Jules: And what's an act of God?
    Vincent: When God makes the impossible possible. But this morning, I don't think it qualifies.
    Jules: Hey, Vincent, don't you see? That shit don't matter. You're judging this shit the wrong way. I mean, it could be that God stopped the bullets, or He changed Coke to Pepsi, He found my fucking car keys. You don't judge shit like this based on merit. Now, whether or not what we experienced was an "according to Hoyle" miracle is insignificant. What is significant is that I felt the touch of God. God got involved.
    Vincent: But why?
    Jules: Well, that's what's fucking with me. I don't know why, but I can't go back to sleep.
    Vincent: You serious? You're really thinking about quitting?
    Jules: The life?
    Vincent: Yeah.
    Jules: Most definitely.
    Vincent: Oh, fuck. What'cha gonna do, then?
    Jules: Well, that's what I've been sitting here contemplating. First, I'm going to deliver this case to Marsellus, then, basically, I'm just going to walk the Earth.
    Vincent: What'cha mean, "walk the Earth"?
    Jules: You know, like Caine in Kung Fu: walk from place to place, meet people, get into adventures.
    Vincent: And how long do you intend to walk the Earth?
    Jules: Until God puts me where he wants me to be.
    Vincent: And what if he don't do that?
    Jules: If it takes forever, then I'll walk forever.
    Vincent: So you decided to be a bum?
    Jules: I'll just be Jules, Vincent; no more, no less.
    Vincent: No, Jules. You've decided to be a bum. Just like those pieces of shit out there who beg for change, sleep in garbage bins and eat what I throw away. They got a name for that, Jules: it's called "a bum". And without a job, a residence or legal tender, that's exactly what you're going to be: a fucking bum.
    Jules: Look, my friend, this is just where you and I differ.
    Vincent: Jules, look, what happened this morning, I agree, it was peculiar. But water into wine, I...
    Jules: All shapes and sizes, Vincent.
    Vincent: Don't fucking talk to me like that, man.
    Jules: If my answers frighten you, then you should cease asking scary questions.
    Vincent: [pauses, looking annoyed] I'm gonna take a shit. Let me ask you something, when did you make this decision? When you were sitting there eating that muffin?
    Jules: Yeah, I was sitting here, eating my muffin and drinking my coffee and replaying the incident in my head, when I had what alcoholics refer to as a moment of clarity.
    Vincent: Fuck. To be continued.

    [Jules has a gun on Ringo; Yolanda points a gun at Jules, yelling hysterically]
    Yolanda: Don't you hurt him!
    Jules: Nobody's gonna hurt anybody. We're all gonna be three little Fonzies here, and what's Fonzie like?
    [Yolanda stares at him, confused]
    Jules: Come on, Yolanda! What's Fonzie like?!
    Yolanda: Cool?
    Jules: What?
    Yolanda: Cool.
    Jules: Correct-a-mundo! And that's what we're gonna be - we're gonna be cool.

hree rangers of the Night's Watch: Ser Waymar Royce, Will, and Gared depart from the Wall to investigate reports of wildlings in the Haunted Forest which lies to the north. Will, the best scout in the group, discovers a number of wildling corpses dismembered and arranged in a strange, ritualistic fashion on the ground.
WightWight of wildling girl.
He also finds a dead wildling girl pinned to a tree. He reports back to the others. Ser Waymar overrides the older Gared's advice that they return to Castle Black to report the situation to their superiors and instead insists on seeing the corpses for himself, to determine what killed them. When they reach the site, the bodies have disappeared. Will scouts around for clues, but Gared finds a bloody piece of clothing buried under the snow. Further investigations are curtailed when a tall, humanoid figure with glowing blue eyes, a White Walker, arrives and kills Ser Waymar with ease. Gared attempts to escape but is caught and killed. Will, in extreme horror, sees the dead wildling girl from earlier now walking with blue eyes, and also witnesses Gared's death, with the White Walker tossing his severed head at Will's feet, before allowing him to leave alive.
In the Seven KingdomsEdit
Theon GreyjoyEddard Stark draws his sword.

Some time later, Will has fled south of the Wall in terror, rather than return to warn Castle Black of the White Walker threat. He is apprehended by outriders loyal to House Stark, the wardens of the North, and is taken to Lord Eddard Stark. Lord Eddard, in the courtyard watching Bran at archery training, decrees that as a deserter from the Watch, Will is an oathbreaker and must die. Will accepts his fate, but tells Eddard about the Walkers first and asks that word be gotten back to his mother. Eddard carries out the execution himself, using the ancestral Valyrian blade of their house, Ice. Two of Eddard's trueborn sons, 17-year-old Robb and 10-year-old Bran, accompany him to the execution along with his bastard son, Jon Snow. Young Bran witnesses an execution for the first time without flinching, earning praise from Jon. Eddard tells Bran that their way is the old way, and that the man who passes the sentence should swing the sword. When Bran asks his father about Will's talk of White Walkers, Eddard dismisses it as a madman's ramblings, insisting that the Walkers have been gone for centuries. The party sets out to return to Winterfell.
Mother of direwolvesStarks find Direwolves.

On the way back to the castle, the party finds a stag dead in the road, partially disemboweled. Looking for what killed it, they find a dead female direwolf, killed with a stag antler piece broken off in her throat. The female died after giving birth, and her five pups huddle by the corpse for warmth. Eddard's ward, Theon Greyjoy, is all for killing the pups, but Jon Snow convinces his father that this is an omen: the direwolf is the symbol of House Stark, and Eddard has five trueborn children. With Bran looking on beseechingly, Eddard agrees that his children should have the pups, but only if they clean, raise, and feed them themselves with no help from the servants. Just as the party leaves, Jon finds a sixth pup, an albino runt of the litter. Theon mockingly points out that this one belongs to Jon.

In King's Landing, the capital city of the Seven Kingdoms, the bells ring out to commemorate the death of Lord Jon Arryn, the Hand of the King. As the Silent Sisters prepare his body for burial, Queen Cersei Lannister looks on. She is worried that Jon discovered something he shouldn't have, and may have told someone. She confesses her fears to her twin brother, Ser Jaime Lannister of the Kingsguard, but he tells her not to worry, since if the King knew the truth they'd be dead already. She tells him he should be the new Hand of the King, but he doesn't want the job. He considers it too much work. Cersei accuses him of taking nothing seriously.

A raven bears news of Jon's death to Winterfell, where Lady Catelyn Stark informs Eddard. He is particularly stricken because Jon Arryn served as a father-figure to him, when he was fostered at the Eyrie. She also tells him that King Robert Baratheon and much of the royal court rides for Winterfell. Eddard realizes that King Robert means to name him as the Hand to replace Jon Arryn. He ponders refusing, feeling his place is at Winterfell.


Over the next few weeks the Stark children grow used to their rapidly-growing direwolves: Robb names his Grey Wind,  Sansa calls hers Lady, and Arya names hers Nymeria after a great warrior-queen. Jon names his Ghost, for his white color and uncanny silence. Bran calls his Summer and six-year-old Rickon names his wolf Shaggydog. Bran's mother catches him climbing on the rooftops of the castle, just as the royal party comes into view. He promises to stop, but his mother knows he is lying. Winterfell prepares for guests. Catelyn Stark wants to make sure Tyrion Lannister, a great reader, has enough candles, and the young men of the house get groomed, as they gossip about the queen, a reportedly great beauty.
House Stark and retainersWinterfell gathers to greet the royal party.

All of Winterfell gathers in the courtyard as the royal party approaches. Arya is late and annoys Sansa by not being silent and respectful when they arrive. King Robert rides in with his knights, while Queen Cersei is in a large wheelhouse. Lord Eddard presents his household to King Robert. After initial greetings, Robert demands to see the crypts and pay his respects to Eddard's deceased sister, Lyanna, much to Queen Cersei's impatience. After Robert and Eddard depart, Cersei sends Jaime to find their younger brother Tyrion who is a dwarf. "The Imp" has found his way to the brothel in the town outside Winterfell, where he enjoys the attentions of a prostitute named Ros. Jaime tells Tyrion, a man of limited height but with immense appetites, that he will be needed at the feast that night. Jaime has hired three more prostitutes for Tyrion, to hurry things along.
Lyanna's statueLyanna's statue in the crypts of Winterfell.

In the crypts Robert offers up his prayers at the tomb of Lyanna Stark, Eddard's younger sister, whom Robert was betrothed to before she was kidnapped by Prince Rhaegar Targaryen and died shortly after being rescued. He tells Eddard that in his dreams he kills Rhaegar every night anew, but Eddard replies that House Targaryen is destroyed. "Not all of them," Robert replies.

Robert formally offers Eddard the role of Hand, and Eddard asks for time to consider. Robert agrees, but offers a sweetener: the hand of his son, Joffrey, in marriage to Eddard's daughter, Sansa. A great feast is held and Cersei and Catelyn exchange cordial words. Cersei seems more impressed by Sansa, thinking that she will be a great hit at court. Outside the feast, Jon Snow works at his sword practice, angry that Catelyn thought it would be inappropriate that a bastard should attend. His uncle Benjen Stark, First Ranger of the Night's Watch, arrives to join the feast, and Jon asks him to take him back to the Wall with him. Benjen agrees to consider it. Tyrion Lannister then arrives and talks to Jon, suggesting that he is too pricklish and quick to take offence when his illegitimacy is pointed out. He should take the insult and wear it like armor, so that no one can hurt him with it. When Jon angrily asks Tyrion what he knows about it, Tyrion replies that "all dwarfs are bastards in their father's eyes."

Eddard and Catelyn receive a letter in the night, delivered to Maester Luwin by a messenger from the Eyrie. The letter is from Catelyn's sister, Lady Lysa Arryn, the widow of Jon Arryn. In the letter Lysa says that Jon Arryn was murdered at the order of the queen, and the Lannisters conspire against King Robert. Luwin councils that Eddard should accept Robert's offer to be Hand, so he can investigate the truth of the matter and protect the King. Catelyn also feels that they should accept the betrothal offer for Sansa (as Sansa seems to want to marry Joffrey). Eddard, while he would prefer to stay at Winterfell, agrees with Luwin and accepts the offer.

The next morning Eddard and Robert go hunting, leaving the castle largely empty. Bran indulges in some climbing, but, whilst climbing a broken tower, he hears noises. He finds the queen and her brother engaged in a sexual act, but is caught watching by Cersei, who warns her brother. Jaime grabs him and asks how old Bran is. When Bran replies "ten," Jaime sighs and pushes him out of the window, saying "the things I do for love."
Across the Narrow SeaEdit

In the Free City of Pentos, across the Narrow Sea, Viserys and Daenerys Targaryen enjoy the hospitality of Magister Illyrio Mopatis. Viserys has arranged to wed Daenerys (also called "Dany") to Khal Drogo, the warlord of a Dothraki khalasar of forty thousand warriors. In return, Drogo will give Viserys the army he needs to reclaim the Iron Throne. Viserys prepares Dany for meeting the Khal. He tells her what a beautiful young woman she has turned into, and slips off her dress and fondles her breast. She is silent and looks away as if pretending it isn't happening. She steps into a hot bath that has just been poured. This greatly distresses her maid who believes the water will scald her. Dany seems not to notice it and emerges unharmed from the water.
Drogo-arrivesDrogo arrives in Pentos and approves of Dany.

Daenerys follows Illyrio and Viserys, before she is to be presented to Drogo. She suddenly announces that she doesn't want to marry him. Viserys says that she will, because in return Drogo will give him an army to retake their father's throne from Robert Baratheon. Viserys says that he would let her be raped by all forty thousand of Drogo's men and their horses if it meant getting his throne back, so she's lucky she only has to sleep with the Khal. Drogo arrives, looks her over, and then rides away, never having dismounted from his horse. Viserys is concerned, but Illyrio assures him that, if he didn't approve of Daenerys, they would have known.
Daenerys in wedding dressDaenerys in her wedding dress

Later, Daenerys marries Khal Drogo and a great celebration is held. Several people die in impromptu duels, which Illyrio says is a good sign: a Dothraki wedding without at least three deaths is considered a dull affair. The bride and groom receive many gifts, but for Dany two are particularly interesting. The first is a box containing three beautiful stones. According to Illyrio these are dragon eggs from the Shadow Lands beyond Asshai that have turned to stone with the passing of time. Dany appears to feel some connection with the eggs, but brushes it off for the time being. The second is a selection of books containing stories and songs from the Seven Kingdoms, given by Ser Jorah Mormont, an exiled knight of House Mormont. Ser Jorah swears fealty to Viserys as King and offers him his support and advice, which is accepted. For his gift, Drogo gives Daenerys a beautiful white stallion. Viserys asks his sister to make Drogo happy. Drogo and Daenerys ride down to the shore and consummate their marriage on the beach at sunset.  Daenerys cries during the process. 

Jon Snow attempts to find his footing at Castle Black amidst hostility and suspicion from his fellow members of the Night's Watch. Eddard Stark and his daughters arrive at King's Landing. Catelyn renews an old friendship with a member of the court, while Daenerys and Viserys journey onwards to the Dothraki capital of Vaes Dothrak.
SummaryEdit
In the Seven KingdomsEdit
Stark party 1x03The Stark party arrives in King's Landing.
The royal party reaches King's Landing. Lord Eddard Stark barely has time to get off of his horse before he is asked to attend a meeting of the king's small council. Before that he runs into Jaime Lannister in the throne room. Jaime is unhappy with Eddard judging him for killing the Mad King, the murderer of Eddard's father and brother, but Jaime is unrepentant. He then meets the council members: Lord Petyr "Littlefinger" Baelish, the king's Master of Coin and a friend of Eddard's wife from childhood; Grand Maester Pycelle, the king's adviser in all matters scientific and academic; Lord Renly Baratheon, the youngest of the king's two brothers and Master of Laws; and Varys, a eunuch and the Master of Whisperers (the head of the king's intelligence network).

Eddard is stunned to learn that the crown is six million Gold Dragons in debt to various debtors, half to Lord Tywin Lannister, and that King Robert Baratheon has ordered this debt increased to pay for a lavish tournament to celebrate Eddard's appointment. Eddard decides to ask Robert to cancel the tournament, but the council is doubtful he'll listen.
Cersei-joffreyCersei and her son.
Elsewhere, Queen Cersei talks to Joffrey about the incident on the river. She tells him that when he is king, the truth will be whatever he decides it will be. Joffrey tells her that he thinks there will be trouble with the Starks, and that when he is King he'll double their taxes, force them to contribute to a standing army and, if they should object, he'd crush them, and install someone loyal like his great-uncle, Kevan as Warden of the North. Cersei points out that the North is too vast and wild to be militarily conquered by outsiders, and as King he needs to be more clever. She also advises him to be kind to Sansa Stark to avoid stirring up trouble for later, and concludes that "Anyone who isn't us is an enemy."

Eddard talks to Arya, who has been arguing with her sister, about the same incident, explaining that Sansa was put in a difficult position by the king and queen, and whilst she shouldn't have lied, winning the long-term approval of Joffrey, her future husband, was important. Arya is unhappy with the situation, but Eddard mollifies her by allowing her to practice with her sword, Needle.
Bran and Old Nan 1x02Old Nan tells Bran of winter and the Long Night.
At Winterfell, Bran has awoken, but cannot remember anything that happened to him on the tower. His injuries have left him bed-ridden and unlikely to walk again. Old Nan, the oldest servant in the castle, tells Bran stories to pass the time, but he doesn't want her usual heroic stories about the likes of Ser Duncan the Tall. She instead speaks of the White Walkers and the coming of a vast winter that will blanket the world. When Robb pays a visit, Bran asks his brother if it is true that his legs are crushed and that he will never walk again. Robb reluctantly says this is so. Bran remarks that he would rather be dead.
Catelyn-arriveCatelyn arrive in King's Landing.
Catelyn Stark and Ser Rodrik arrive at King's Landing and attempt to sneak into the city, but are spotted by one of Littlefinger's men. They are taken to meet Littlefinger at a brothel he owns, where Lord Varys is also waiting: one of his 'little birds' told him they were coming. Catelyn is angered by the way they've been treated, but asks Littlefinger for aid in finding the people who tried to have Bran killed. Littlefinger is able to answer this quickly: the elaborate dagger wielded by the assassin used to be his, but he lost it in a gamble with Tyrion Lannister.
Eddard and Petyr 1x03Eddard threatens Lord Baelish.
Littlefinger fetches Eddard to meet his wife, but Eddard suspects a trick and pushes Littlefinger up against a wall outside the brothel wanting to know what his game is. Catelyn then appears, and Eddard is pacified. After hearing her news, he vows to find the truth and expose the Lannisters to Robert. Littlefinger agrees to be his ally in this, for the affection he once bore Catelyn as a youngster.

At Castle Black, the primary redoubt of the Night's Watch in the shadow of the Wall, Jon Snow shows his worth to the trainer, Ser Alliser Thorne, by besting several fellow members of the Watch in the practice yard. Thorne is disgusted at the poor performance of the others, but has no praise for Jon either, dubbing him Lord Snow, and describing him as "the least useless person here". Later on, several of the other recruits gang up on him, but the situation is defused by Tyrion. Tyrion points out to Jon that none of the other recruits had the benefit of a skilled master-at-arms to train them, and Jon is alienating them through his stand-offish attitude and superior combat skills.
Jaime and Cersei 1x03Jaime comforts Cersei.

Ravens arrive at Castle Black and King's Landing with news of Bran's recovery. In the capital Cersei fears he will expose their secret, but Jaime comforts her. Elsewhere, Robert swaps old war stories with Ser Barristan Selmy, a distinguished and famous knight and the commander of the Kingsguard. When Jaime Lannister appears, Robert jokingly questions him about Aerys Targaryen's death, wondering if the Mad King died begging for mercy, but Jaime rather coldly replies that the master he betrayed died screaming the same words he'd been saying since the siege of King's Landing began: "Burn them all".

At Castle Black, Tyrion meets with Lord Commander Jeor Mormont, the head of the Night's Watch, and his chief adviser, the ancient and blind Maester Aemon. Jeor asks for Tyrion to intercede at court and get the Watch more men, as they are dangerously under-strength. Aemon warns that the Stark words are right: a terrible winter is coming and more dangerous things than just wildlings might come with it; after all, one of their number swore that the White Walkers had returned... right up to the moment Ned Stark cut his head off. Tyrion admits his skepticism that supernatural creatures might exist, but agrees to bring word to his queen.
Jon and Benjen 1x03Benjen talks with Jon on the Wall.
Later, Benjen Stark meets Jon atop the Wall and tells him he is going on a ranging in the Haunted Forest. He refuses to take Jon with him, telling him he isn't ready, and that here rank and nobility means nothing: every man must earn everything he gets. Before departing for King's Landing, Tyrion fulfills an old ambition by climbing to the top of the Wall and urinating off the edge of it. He and Jon share a moment of fellowship before he departs for the capital in the company of Yoren, the recruiter for the Night's Watch who is also bound for King's Landing.

In King's Landing, Eddard has contracted a swordmaster, Syrio Forel, the former First Sword of Braavos, to teach Arya how to use her sword properly. Arya is thrilled, and 'the dance' begins. As Eddard watches them practice, his pleasure at seeing Arya happy sours when he realizes that a conflict between the Starks and Lannisters may be inevitable; his daughter may well be training herself for war.
Across the Narrow SeaEdit
Daenerys 1x03Daeneyrs rides with the khalasar.

Daenerys commands the khalasar to halt on a whim, exercising her growing authority and power. Viserys does not take well to being commanded and threatens his sister. He is strangled by Rakharo, a Dothraki warrior wielding a whip. Daenerys calms the situation and Viserys is forced to walk, a sign of shame amongst the horse-riding Dothraki. Later, Daenerys is told she is pregnant by Irri. She relays the news to Khal Drogo and tells him she thinks it will be a boy as they lay naked in each others arms. Ser Jorah Mormont and Rakharo compare the Westerosi and Dothraki ways of battle; of the heavily-armored but slow knights versus the lightly-armored but fast-moving horse-warriors. Jorah has heard of Rakharo's father, a great warrior, but admits that he disgraced his own father, a man of great honor. When he learns that Daenerys is pregnant, he announces he must split off from the column to ride to the Free City of Qohor, but will rejoin them before they reach Vaes Dothrak.
RecapEdit


`Curiouser and curiouser!' cried Alice (she was so much surprised, that for the moment she quite forgot how to speak good English); `now I'm opening out like the largest telescope that ever was! Good-bye, feet!' (for when she looked down at her feet, they seemed to be almost out of sight, they were getting so far off). `Oh, my poor little feet, I wonder who will put on your shoes and stockings for you now, dears? I'm sure _I_ shan't be able! I shall be a great deal too far off to trouble myself about you: you must manage the best way you can; --but I must be kind to them,' thought Alice, `or perhaps they won't walk the way I want to go! Let me see: I'll give them a new pair of boots every Christmas.'

And she went on planning to herself how she would manage it. `They must go by the carrier,' she thought; `and how funny it'll seem, sending presents to one's own feet! And how odd the directions will look!

ALICE'S RIGHT FOOT, ESQ.
HEARTHRUG,
NEAR THE FENDER,
(WITH ALICE'S LOVE).

Oh dear, what nonsense I'm talking!'

Just then her head struck against the roof of the hall: in fact she was now more than nine feet high, and she at once took up the little golden key and hurried off to the garden door.

Poor Alice! It was as much as she could do, lying down on one side, to look through into the garden with one eye; but to get through was more hopeless than ever: she sat down and began to cry again.

`You ought to be ashamed of yourself,' said Alice, `a great girl like you,' ( she might well say this), `to go on crying in this way! Stop this moment, I tell you!' But she went on all the same, shedding gallons of tears, until there was a large pool all round her, about four inches deep and reaching half down the hall .

After a time she heard a little pattering of feet in the distance, and she hastily dried her eyes to see what was coming. It was the White Rabbit returning , splendidly dressed, with a pair of white kid gloves in one hand and a large fan in the other: he came trotting along in a great hurry, muttering to himself as he came, `Oh! the Duchess, the Duchess! Oh! won't she be savage if I've kept her waiting!' Alice felt so desperate that she was ready to ask help of any one; so, when the Rabbit came near her, she began, in a low, timid voice, `If you please, sir--' The Rabbit started violently, dropped the white kid gloves and the fan, and skurried away into the darkness as hard as he could go.

Alice took up the fan and gloves, and, as the hall was very hot, she kept fanning herself all the time she went on talking: `Dear, dear! How queer everything is to-day! And yesterday things went on just as usual. I wonder if I' ve been changed in the night? Let me think: was I the same when I got up this morning? I almost think I can remember feeling a little different. But if I'm not the same, the next question is, Who in the world am I? Ah, THAT'S the great puzzle!' And she began thinking over all the children she knew that were of the same age as herself, to see if she could have been changed for any of them.

`I'm sure I'm not Ada,' she said, `for her hair goes in such long ringlets, and mine doesn't go in ringlets at all; and I'm sure I can't be Mabel, for I know all sorts of things, and she, oh! she knows such a very little! Besides, SHE'S she, and I'm I, and--oh dear, how puzzling it all is! I'll try if I know all the things I used to know. Let me see: four times five is twelve, and four times six is thirteen, and four times seven is--oh dear! I shall never get to twenty at that rate! However, the Multiplication Table doesn't signify: let's try Geography. London is the capital of Paris, and Paris is the capital of Rome, and Rome--no, THAT'S all wrong, I'm certain! I must have been changed for Mabel! I'll try and say "How doth the little--"' and she crossed her hands on her lap as if she were saying lessons, and began to repeat it, but her voice sounded hoarse and strange, and the words did not come the same as they used to do:--

`How doth the little crocodile Improve his shining tail, And pour the waters of the Nile On every golden scale!

`How cheerfully he seems to grin, How neatly spread his claws, And welcome little fishes in With gently smiling jaws!'

`I'm sure those are not the right words,' said poor Alice, and her eyes filled with tears again as she went on, `I must be Mabel after all, and I shall have to go and live in that poky little house, and have next to no toys to play with, and oh! ever so many lessons to learn! No, I've made up my mind about it; if I'm Mabel, I'll stay down here! It'll be no use their putting their heads down and saying "Come up again, dear!" I shall only look up and say "Who am I then? Tell me that first, and then, if I like being that person, I'll come up: if not, I'll stay down here till I'm somebody else"--but, oh dear!' cried Alice, with a sudden burst of tears, `I do wish they WOULD put their heads down! I am so VERY tired of being all alone here!'

As she said this she looked down at her hands, and was surprised to see that she had put on one of the Rabbit's little white kid gloves while she was talking . `How CAN I have done that?' she thought. `I must be growing small again.' She got up and went to the table to measure herself by it, and found that, as nearly as she could guess, she was now about two feet high, and was going on shrinking rapidly: she soon found out that the cause of this was the fan she was holding, and she dropped it hastily, just in time to avoid shrinking away altogether.

`That WAS a narrow escape!' said Alice, a good deal frightened at the sudden change, but very glad to find herself still in existence; `and now for the garden!' and she ran with all speed back to the little door: but, alas! the little door was shut again, and the little golden key was lying on the glass table as before, `and things are worse than ever,' thought the poor child, `for I never was so small as this before, never! And I declare it's too bad, that it is!'

As she said these words her foot slipped, and in another moment, splash! she was up to her chin in salt water. He first idea was that she had somehow fallen into the sea, `and in that case I can go back by railway,' she said to herself. (Alice had been to the seaside once in her life, and had come to the general conclusion, that wherever you go to on the English coast you find a number of bathing machines in the sea, some children digging in the sand with wooden spades, then a row of lodging houses, and behind them a railway station.) However, she soon made out that she was in the pool of tears which she had wept when she was nine feet high.

`I wish I hadn't cried so much!' said Alice, as she swam about, trying to find her way out. `I shall be punished for it now, I suppose, by being drowned in my own tears! That WILL be a queer thing, to be sure! However, everything is queer to-day.'

Just then she heard something splashing about in the pool a little way off, and she swam nearer to make out what it was: at first she thought it must be a walrus or hippopotamus, but then she remembered how small she was now, and she soon made out that it was only a mouse that had slipped in like herself.

`Would it be of any use, now,' thought Alice, `to speak to this mouse? Everything is so out-of-the-way down here, that I should think very likely it can talk: at any rate, there's no harm in trying.' So she began: `O Mouse, do you know the way out of this pool? I am very tired of swimming about here, O Mouse!' (Alice thought this must be the right way of speaking to a mouse: she had never done such a thing before, but she remembered having seen in her brother's Latin Grammar, `A mouse--of a mouse--to a mouse--a mouse--O mouse!' The Mouse looked at her rather inquisitively, and seemed to her to wink with one of its little eyes, but it said nothing.

`Perhaps it doesn't understand English,' thought Alice; `I daresay it's a French mouse, come over with William the Conqueror.' (For, with all her knowledge of history, Alice had no very clear notion how long ago anything had happened.) So she began again: `Ou est ma chatte?' which was the first sentence in her French lesson-book. The Mouse gave a sudden leap out of the water, and seemed to quiver all over with fright. `Oh, I beg your pardon!' cried Alice hastily, afraid that she had hurt the poor animal's feelings. `I quite forgot you didn't like cats.'

`Not like cats!' cried the Mouse, in a shrill, passionate voice. `Would YOU like cats if you were me?'

`Well, perhaps not,' said Alice in a soothing tone: `don't be angry about it. And yet I wish I could show you our cat Dinah: I think you'd take a fancy to cats if you could only see her. She is such a dear quiet thing,' Alice went on, half to herself, as she swam lazily about in the pool, `and she sits purring so nicely by the fire, licking her paws and washing her face--and she is such a nice soft thing to nurse--and she's such a capital one for catching mice--oh, I beg your pardon!' cried Alice again, for this time the Mouse was bristling all over, and she felt certain it must be really offended. `We won't talk about her any more if you'd rather not.'

`We indeed!' cried the Mouse, who was trembling down to the end of his tail. `As if I would talk on such a subject! Our family always HATED cats: nasty, low, vulgar things! Don't let me hear the name again!'

`I won't indeed!' said Alice, in a great hurry to change the subject of conversation. `Are you--are you fond--of--of dogs?' The Mouse did not answer, so Alice went on eagerly: `There is such a nice little dog near our house I should like to show you! A little bright-eyed terrier, you know, with oh, such long curly brown hair! And it'll fetch things when you throw them, and it'll sit up and beg for its dinner, and all sorts of things--I can't remember half of them-- and it belongs to a farmer, you know, and he says it's so useful, it's worth a hundred pounds! He says it kills all the rats and--oh dear!' cried Alice in a sorrowful tone, `I'm afraid I've offended it again!' For the Mouse was swimming away from her as hard as it could go, and making quite a commotion in the pool as it went.

So she called softly after it, `Mouse dear! Do come back again, and we won't talk about cats or dogs either, if you don't like them!' When the Mouse heard this, it turned round and swam slowly back to her: its face was quite pale (with passion, Alice thought), and it said in a low trembling voice, `Let us get to the shore, and then I'll tell you my history, and you'll understand why it is I hate cats and dogs.'

It was high time to go, for the pool was getting quite crowded with the birds and animals that had fallen into it: there were a Duck and a Dodo, a Lory and an Eaglet, and several other curious creatures. Alice led the way, and the whole party swam to the shore. 

 A large rose-tree stood near the entrance of the garden: the roses growing on it were white, but there were three gardeners at it, busily painting them red. Alice thought this a very curious thing, and she went nearer to watch them, and just as she came up to them she heard one of them say, `Look out now, Five! Don't go splashing paint over me like that!'

`I couldn't help it,' said Five, in a sulky tone; `Seven jogged my elbow.'

On which Seven looked up and said, `That's right, Five! Always lay the blame on others!'

`YOU'D better not talk!' said Five. `I heard the Queen say only yesterday you deserved to be beheaded!'

`What for?' said the one who had spoken first.

`That's none of YOUR business, Two!' said Seven.

`Yes, it IS his business!' said Five, `and I'll tell him--it was for bringing the cook tulip-roots instead of onions.'

Seven flung down his brush, and had just begun `Well, of all the unjust things--' when his eye chanced to fall upon Alice, as she stood watching them, and he checked himself suddenly: the others looked round also, and all of them bowed low.

`Would you tell me,' said Alice, a little timidly, `why you are painting those roses?'

Five and Seven said nothing, but looked at Two. Two began in a low voice, `Why the fact is, you see, Miss, this here ought to have been a RED rose-tree, and we put a white one in by mistake; and if the Queen was to find it out, we should all have our heads cut off, you know. So you see, Miss, we're doing our best, afore she comes, to--' At this moment Five, who had been anxiously looking across the garden, called out `The Queen! The Queen!' and the three gardeners instantly threw themselves flat upon their faces. There was a sound of many footsteps, and Alice looked round, eager to see the Queen.

First came ten soldiers carrying clubs; these were all shaped like the three gardeners, oblong and flat, with their hands and feet at the corners: next the ten courtiers; these were ornamented all over with diamonds, and walked two and two, as the soldiers did. After these came the royal children; there were ten of them, and the little dears came jumping merrily along hand in hand, in couples: they were all ornamented with hearts. Next came the guests, mostly Kings and Queens, and among them Alice recognised the White Rabbit: it was talking in a hurried nervous manner, smiling at everything that was said, and went by without noticing her. Then followed the Knave of Hearts, carrying the King's crown on a crimson velvet cushion; and, last of all this grand procession, came THE KING AND QUEEN OF HEARTS.

Alice was rather doubtful whether she ought not to lie down on her face like the three gardeners, but she could not remember every having heard of such a rule at processions; `and besides, what would be the use of a procession,' thought she, `if people had all to lie down upon their faces, so that they couldn't see it?' So she stood still where she was, and waited.

When the procession came opposite to Alice, they all stopped and looked at her, and the Queen said severely `Who is this?' She said it to the Knave of Hearts, who only bowed and smiled in reply.

`Idiot!' said the Queen, tossing her head impatiently; and, turning to Alice, she went on, `What's your name, child?'

`My name is Alice, so please your Majesty,' said Alice very politely; but she added, to herself, `Why, they're only a pack of cards, after all. I needn't be afraid of them!'

`And who are THESE?' said the Queen, pointing to the three gardeners who were lying round the rosetree; for, you see, as they were lying on their faces, and the pattern on their backs was the same as the rest of the pack, she could not tell whether they were gardeners, or soldiers, or courtiers, or three of her own children.

`How should I know?' said Alice, surprised at her own courage. `It's no business of MINE.'

The Queen turned crimson with fury, and, after glaring at her for a moment like a wild beast, screamed `Off with her head! Off--'

`Nonsense!' said Alice, very loudly and decidedly, and the Queen was silent.

The King laid his hand upon her arm, and timidly said `Consider, my dear: she is only a child!'

The Queen turned angrily away from him, and said to the Knave `Turn them over!'

The Knave did so, very carefully, with one foot.

`Get up!' said the Queen, in a shrill, loud voice, and the three gardeners instantly jumped up, and began bowing to the King, the Queen, the royal children, and everybody else.

`Leave off that!' screamed the Queen. `You make me giddy.' And then, turning to the rose-tree, she went on, `What HAVE you been doing here?'

`May it please your Majesty,' said Two, in a very humble tone, going down on one knee as he spoke, `we were trying--'

`I see!' said the Queen, who had meanwhile been examining the roses. `Off with their heads!' and the procession moved on, three of the soldiers remaining behind to execute the unfortunate gardeners, who ran to Alice for protection.

`You shan't be beheaded!' said Alice, and she put them into a large flower-pot that stood near. The three soldiers wandered about for a minute or two, looking for them, and then quietly marched off after the others.

`Are their heads off?' shouted the Queen.

`Their heads are gone, if it please your Majesty!' the soldiers shouted in reply.

`That's right!' shouted the Queen. `Can you play croquet?'

The soldiers were silent, and looked at Alice, as the question was evidently meant for her.

`Yes!' shouted Alice.

`Come on, then!' roared the Queen, and Alice joined the procession, wondering very much what would happen next.

`It's--it's a very fine day!' said a timid voice at her side. She was walking by the White Rabbit, who was peeping anxiously into her face.

`Very,' said Alice: `--where's the Duchess?'

`Hush! Hush!' said the Rabbit in a low, hurried tone. He looked anxiously over his shoulder as he spoke, and then raised himself upon tiptoe, put his mouth close to her ear, and whispered `She's under sentence of execution.'

`What for?' said Alice.

`Did you say "What a pity!"?' the Rabbit asked.

`No, I didn't,' said Alice: `I don't think it's at all a pity. I said "What for?"'

`She boxed the Queen's ears--' the Rabbit began. Alice gave a little scream of laughter. `Oh, hush!' the Rabbit whispered in a frightened tone. `The Queen will hear you! You see, she came rather late, and the Queen said--'

`Get to your places!' shouted the Queen in a voice of thunder, and people began running about in all directions, tumbling up against each other; however, they got settled down in a minute or two, and the game began. Alice thought she had never seen such a curious croquet-ground in her life; it was all ridges and furrows; the balls were live hedgehogs, the mallets live flamingoes, and the soldiers had to double themselves up and to stand on their hands and feet, to make the arches.

The chief difficulty Alice found at first was in managing her flamingo: she succeeded in getting its body tucked away, comfortably enough, under her arm, with its legs hanging down, but generally, just as she had got its neck nicely straightened out, and was going to give the hedgehog a blow with its head, it WOULD twist itself round and look up in her face, with such a puzzled expression that she could not help bursting out laughing: and when she had got its head down, and was going to begin again, it was very provoking to find that the hedgehog had unrolled itself, and was in the act of crawling away: besides all this, there was generally a ridge or furrow in the way wherever she wanted to send the hedgehog to, and, as the doubled-up soldiers were always getting up and walking off to other parts of the ground, Alice soon came to the conclusion that it was a very difficult game indeed.

The players all played at once without waiting for turns, quarrelling all the while, and fighting for the hedgehogs; and in a very short time the Queen was in a furious passion, and went stamping about, and shouting `Off with his head!' or `Off with her head!' about once in a minute.

Alice began to feel very uneasy: to be sure, she had not as yet had any dispute with the Queen, but she knew that it might happen any minute, `and then,' thought she, `what would become of me? They're dreadfully fond of beheading people here; the great wonder is, that there's any one left alive!'

She was looking about for some way of escape, and wondering whether she could get away without being seen, when she noticed a curious appearance in the air: it puzzled her very much at first, but, after watching it a minute or two, she made it out to be a grin, and she said to herself `It's the Cheshire Cat: now I shall have somebody to talk to.'

`How are you getting on?' said the Cat, as soon as there was mouth enough for it to speak with.

Alice waited till the eyes appeared, and then nodded. `It's no use speaking to it,' she thought, `till its ears have come, or at least one of them.' In another minute the whole head appeared, and then Alice put down her flamingo, and began an account of the game, feeling very glad she had someone to listen to her. The Cat seemed to think that there was enough of it now in sight, and no more of it appeared.

`I don't think they play at all fairly,' Alice began, in rather a complaining tone, `and they all quarrel so dreadfully one can't hear oneself speak--and they don't seem to have any rules in particular; at least, if there are, nobody attends to them--and you've no idea how confusing it is all the things being alive; for instance, there's the arch I've got to go through next walking about at the other end of the ground--and I should have croqueted the Queen's hedgehog just now, only it ran away when it saw mine coming!'

`How do you like the Queen?' said the Cat in a low voice.

`Not at all,' said Alice: `she's so extremely--' Just then she noticed that the Queen was close behind her, listening: so she went on, `--likely to win, that it's hardly worth while finishing the game.'

The Queen smiled and passed on.

`Who ARE you talking to?' said the King, going up to Alice, and looking at the Cat's head with great curiosity.

`It's a friend of mine--a Cheshire Cat,' said Alice: `allow me to introduce it.'

`I don't like the look of it at all,' said the King: `however, it may kiss my hand if it likes.'

`I'd rather not,' the Cat remarked.

`Don't be impertinent,' said the King, `and don't look at me like that!' He got behind Alice as he spoke.

`A cat may look at a king,' said Alice. `I've read that in some book, but I don't remember where.'

`Well, it must be removed,' said the King very decidedly, and he called the Queen, who was passing at the moment, `My dear! I wish you would have this cat removed!'

The Queen had only one way of settling all difficulties, great or small. `Off with his head!' she said, without even looking round.

`I'll fetch the executioner myself,' said the King eagerly, and he hurried off.

Alice thought she might as well go back, and see how the game was going on, as she heard the Queen's voice in the distance, screaming with passion. She had already heard her sentence three of the players to be executed for having missed their turns, and she did not like the look of things at all, as the game was in such confusion that she never knew whether it was her turn or not. So she went in search of her hedgehog.

The hedgehog was engaged in a fight with another hedgehog, which seemed to Alice an excellent opportunity for croqueting one of them with the other: the only difficulty was, that her flamingo was gone across to the other side of the garden, where Alice could see it trying in a helpless sort of way to fly up into a tree.

By the time she had caught the flamingo and brought it back, the fight was over, and both the hedgehogs were out of sight: `but it doesn't matter much,' thought Alice, `as all the arches are gone from this side of the ground.' So she tucked it away under her arm, that it might not escape again, and went back for a little more conversation with her friend.

When she got back to the Cheshire Cat, she was surprised to find quite a large crowd collected round it: there was a dispute going on between the executioner, the King, and the Queen, who were all talking at once, while all the rest were quite silent, and looked very uncomfortable.

The moment Alice appeared, she was appealed to by all three to settle the question, and they repeated their arguments to her, though, as they all spoke at once, she found it very hard indeed to make out exactly what they said.

The executioner's argument was, that you couldn't cut off a head unless there was a body to cut it off from: that he had never had to do such a thing before, and he wasn't going to begin at HIS time of life.

The King's argument was, that anything that had a head could be beheaded, and that you weren't to talk nonsense.

The Queen's argument was, that if something wasn't done about it in less than no time she'd have everybody executed, all round. (It was this last remark that had made the whole party look so grave and anxious.)

Alice could think of nothing else to say but `It belongs to the Duchess: you'd better ask HER about it.'

`She's in prison,' the Queen said to the executioner: `fetch her here.' And the executioner went off like an arrow.

The Cat's head began fading away the moment he was gone, and, by the time he had come back with the Dutchess, it had entirely disappeared; so the King and the executioner ran wildly up and down looking for it, while the rest of the party went back to the game. 


* Login   * Register 	* FAQ
Game of Thrones Transcripts
Share on facebook Share on twitter Share on email Share on print More Sharing Services 0

Forever Dreaming » Transcripts » Game of Thrones Transcripts




1x05 - The Wolf and The Lion

  Page 1 of 1   [ 1 post ] 	New Topic Add Reply
  Print view 	Previous topic | First unread post | Next topic 
Author 	Message
 Offline bunniefuu 	
 1x05 - The Wolf and The Lion
 Posted: May 13 13 6:18 PM Unread post
# 1 
User avatar
Administrator
Posts: 23443

Reply  
	
Credit: http://www.losttv-forum.com/

Season 1, Episode 5 "The Wolf and the Lion"
Written by: David Benioff and D.B. Weiss
Directed by: Brian Kirk
Transcript by: clayseason1
_________________________

[King's Landing - Ned Stark crosses the stone bridge to the Tourney of the Hand's grounds. He passes workers as they prepare for the day's games and enters the fallen Ser Hugh's tent where he joins Barristan Selmy watching over the dead knight's burial preparations.]

NED: Does Ser Hugh have any family in the capital?

BARRISTAN: No. I stood vigil for him myself last night. He had no one else.

NED: He'd never worn this armor before.

BARRISTAN: Bad luck for him ... going against the Mountain.

NED: Who determines the draw?

BARRISTAN: All the knights draw straws, Lord Stark.

NED: Aye ... but who holds the straws? (addressing the body's attendants) You've done good work, sisters.

[Both Ned and Barristan exit the tent and walk along the other tents as they talk.]

BARRISTAN: Life is strange. Not so many years ago we fought as enemies at the Trident.

NED: I'm glad we never met on the field, Ser Barristan ... as is my wife. I don't think the widow's life would suit her.

BARRISTAN: (chuckles) You're too modest. I've seen you cut down a dozen great knights.

NED: My father once told me you were the best he'd ever seen. I never knew the man to be wrong about matters of combat.

BARRISTAN: He was a fine man, your father. What the Mad King did to him was a terrible crime.

NED: (pointing back to Ser Hugh's tent) And that lad ... he was a squire until a few months ago. How could he afford a new suit of armor?

BARRISTAN: Perhaps Lord Arryn left him some money? I hear the King wants to joust today.

NED: Yes. That will never happen.

BARRISTAN: (chuckles) Robert tends to do what he wants.

NED: If the King got what he wanted all the time, we'd still be fighting a damned rebellion.

[Ned leaves Barristan's side and enters King Robert Baratheon's tent. Inside, Lancel Lannister is attempting to dress King Robert in his armament.]

LANCEL: It's made too small, Your Grace. It won't go.

KING ROBERT: Your mother was a dumb whore with a fat ass. Did you know that? (addressing Ned) Look at this idiot! One ball and no brains. He can't even put a man's armor on him properly.

NED: You're too fat for your armor.

KING ROBERT: Fat? Fat, is it? Is that how you speak to your King? (King Robert and Ned Laugh. King Robert turns to Lancel who is grinning.)That was funny, is it?

LANCEL: No, Your Grace.

KING ROBERT: No? You don't like the Hand's joke?

NED: You're torturing the poor boy.

KING ROBERT: You heard the Hand. The King's too fat for his armor! Go find the breastplate stretcher -- now!

NED: the breastplate stretcher?

[Ned leaves]

KING ROBERT: How long before he figures it out?

NED: Maybe you should have one invented.

KING ROBERT: All right, all right. But you watch me out there. I still know how to point a lance.

NED: You have no business jousting. Leave that for the young men.

KING ROBERT: Why? Because I'm king? Piss on that. I want to hit somebody!

NED: And who's going to hit you back?

KING ROBERT: Anybody who can. And the last man in his saddle ... will be you!

NED: There's not a man in the Seven Kingdoms would risk hurting you.

KING ROBERT: Are you telling me those cowards would let me win?

NED: Aye.

KING ROBERT: (pours Ned a drink and offers it to him) Drink.

NED: I'm not thirsty.

KING ROBERT: Drink. Your King commands it. Gods! Too fat for my armor.

NED: Your squire ... a Lannister boy?

KING ROBERT: hmm ... a bloody idiot ... but Cersei insisted. I have Jon Arryn to thank for her. "Cersei Lannister will make a good match", he told me. "You'll need her father on your side." I thought being King meant I could do whatever I wanted. Enough of this! Let's go watch 'em ride. At least I can smell someone else's blood. (The king rises and starts to leave the tent.)

NED: Robert?

KING ROBERT: What? (Looking down, King Robert sees his naked fat belly protruding from his jacket) (laughing) Oh! An inspiring sight for the people, eh? Come! Bow before your King! Bow, you shits!

[Cheering crowds line both sides of the jousting track as Ser Gregor Clegane (The Mountain) rides down the lane, stops in front of the King's stand, opens his helmet and bows. A tier down from the King's left, Ned is seated next to his daughter, Sansa Stark. Littlefinger (Petyr Baelish) sits directly behind them.]

NED: Where's Arya

SANSA: At her dancing lessons. (Sansa looks up the jousting track.) The Knight of the Flowers. (aka Ser Loras Tyrell, who rides up to Sansa and hands her a rose.)

SANSA: Thank you, Ser Loras.

[After nodding toward Sansa, Loras exchanges a secretive look with the King's brother, Renly Baratheon, who is seated higher up. Then he rides over and joins his opponent, Gregor in front of the King's stand. Gregor's horse becomes skittish and both men ride off in opposite directions toward the ends of the jousting track.]

SANSA: (grabbing her father's arm) Don't let Ser Gregor hurt him.

NED: Hey.

SANSA: I can't watch.

LITTLEFINGER: (turned around and speaking to Renly) 100 gold dragons on the Mountain.

RENLY: I'll take that bet.

LITTLEFINGER: Now what will I buy with 100 gold dragons? A dozen barrels of Dornish wine? Or a girl from the pleasure houses of Lys?

RENLY: Or you could even buy a friend.

SANSA: (to Ned) He's going to die.

NED: Ser Loras rides well.

[The trumpet sounds and both jousters ride toward one another. Loras' lance breaks upon Gregor's shield and knocks Gregor down to the ground. Renly jumps up laughing and clapping.]

RENLY: Such a shame, Littlefinger. It would have been so nice for you to have a friend.

LITTLEFINGER: And tell me, Lord Renly, when will you be having your friend? (indicating Loras)

LITTLEFINGER: (now seated, leans forward, speaking to Ned) Loras knew his mare was in heat. Quite crafty, really.

SANSA: Ser Loras would never do that! There's no honor in tricks.

LITTLEFINGER: No honor but quite a bit of gold.

[Gregor rises from the ground, rips off his helmet and shouts for his sword. Gregor grabs the sword from his squire and with one mighty stroke, severs his horse's head. Shocked, the crowd grows quiet. Then Gregor storms over to Loras, knocks him off of his horse and strikes with his sword. Loras' shield protects him from the blows. Sandor Clegane (The Hound) roars, "Leave him be!" Drawing his own sword, The Hound jumps down from the King's stand and engages his brother, Gregor in a sword fight.]

KING ROBERT: (rising, shouts) Stop this madness in the name of your King!

[The Hound drops to his knee and bows his head, while Gregor's blade slices the air where The Hound's head was just seconds ago. Gregor throws down his sword and stomps off through the crowd. Loras approaches Sandor the Hound.]

LORAS: I owe you my life, Ser.

SANDOR: I'm no Ser.

[Loras grabs Sandor's left hand with his right and raises both in the air to the cheers of a standing ovation.]

[Catelyn Stark, her men and her prisoner, Tyrion Lannister, take a rest stop along the way to The Vale. One of Stark's men roughly pulls a hooded and tied, Tyrion Lannister from his horse.]

CATELYN: Remove his hood.

[Stark's man yanks the hood off of Tyrion and pushes him along while, Marillion, a troubadour from The Riverlands, strums his flute and sings until Tyrion comes face-to-face with Catelyn.]

MARILLION: (singing) On that eve, the captive Imp down-wards from his horse did limp, no more would he preen and primp, in garb of red and gold.

TYRION: This isn't the Kings Road. You said we were riding for Winterfell.

CATELYN: I did ... often and loudly.

TYRION: Very wise. (Tyrion begins turning in circles, making sure to make eye contact as he speaks.) They'll be out in droves, looking for me in the wrong place. Word's probably gotten to my father by now. He'll be offering a handsome reward. Everyone knows a Lannister always pays his debts. Would you be so good as to untie me?

CATELYN: And why would I do that?

TYRION: Why not? Am I going to run? The hill tribes would kill me for my boots. Unless a Shadowcat ate me first.

CATELYN: Shadowcats and hill tribes are the least of your concerns.

TYRION: Ah ... the Eastern Road. We're going to The Vale. You're taking me to your sister's to answer for my imagined crimes. Tell me, Lady Stark. When was the last time you saw your sister?

CATELYN: Five years ago.

TYRION: She's changed. She was always a bit touched, but now ... you might as well kill me here.

CATELYN: I am not a murderer, Lannister.

TYRION: Neither am I! I had nothing to do with the attempt on your son's life!

CATELYN: The dagger found

TYRION: What sort of imbecile arms an assassin with his own blade?

RODRIK: Should I gag him?

TYRION: Why? Am I starting to make sense?

[Suddenly, a shot rings out and one of Stark's men falls to the ground. Men, brandishes axes, swords and slinging rocks, swoop in on them from all sides. Rodrik grabs Catelyn and guides her to a safer spot.]

RODRIK: My Lady, this way.

[Tyrion watches the small intense battle as throats are slit and heads bashed in. He sees Catelyn pull out a small dagger and rushes over to her.]

TYRION: Untie me. If I die, what's the point?

[Catelyn cuts Tyrion's bonds. He looks around and makes a dash for a shield. Tyrion grabs the shield and holds it up just in time to avoid a well-aimed rock. He looks back toward Catelyn and sees she's under attack. One of her men rushes to save her, but he is felled by the attacker. Tyrion runs over and batters the attacker with the shield. Once the attacker is down, Tyrion repeatedly drives the shield's edge into the man's face and neck, killing him and saving Catelyn. The fight ends; many are dead. Catelyn stumbles over to Winterfell's Master-at-Arms.]

CATELYN: Rodrik?

RODRIK: I'll be fine, My Lady. There's no need to bloody yourself.

[Bronn sheaths his sword and walks over to Tyrion.]

BRONN: Your first? (Tyrion nods.) You need a woman. Nothing like a woman after a fight.

TYRION: (looking at Catelyn) Well, I'm willing if she is.

[Winterfell - Theon Greyjoy is practicing his archery skills. Bran Stark and Maester Luwin are seated at a table behind Theon. Bran is supposed to be studying but he can't keep his eyes off Theon's target practice.]

LUWIN: Bran ... (Maester Luwin taps a pointer on a map of Westeros.)

BRAN: The Iron Islands. Sigil -- a Kraken. Words -- "We do not sow".

LUWIN: Lords?

BRAN: The Greyjoys.

THEON: (turns to face Bran) Famed for their skills at archery, navigation and lovemaking.

LUWIN: And failed rebellions. (Maester Luwin taps again.)

BRAN: Sigil -- a stag. -- a crowned stag now that Robert's King.

LUWIN: Good.

BRAN: Words -- "Ours is the fury". Lords -- the Baratheons.

LUWIN: mm - hmm.

BRAN: The Westerlands -- sigil -- a lion.

LUWIN: hmm ..

BRAN: Words -- "A Lannister always pays his debts."

LUWIN: No. A common saying, but not their official motto.

BRAN: Lords -- the Lannisters.

LUWIN: We're still on their words.

BRAN: I don't know them.

LUWIN: You do know them. Think.

BRAN: "Unbowed, unbent, unbroken".

LUWIN: That's House Martell.

BRAN: "Righteous in wrath".

LUWIN: House Hornwood.

BRAN: "Family, duty, honor".

LUWIN: Those are Tully words ... your mother's. Are we playing a game?

BRAN: "Family, duty, honor" ... is that the right order?

LUWIN: You know it is.

BRAN: Family comes first?

LUWIN: Your mother had to leave Winterfell to protect the family.

BRAN: How can she protect the family, if she's not with her family?

LUWIN: Your mother sat by your bed for three weeks while you slept.

BRAN: And then she left!

LUWIN: When you were born, I was the one who pulled you from your mother. I placed you in her arms. From that moment until the moment she dies, she will love you. Absolutely. Fiercely.

BRAN: Why did she leave?

LUWIN: I still can't tell you, but she will be home soon.

BRAN: Do you know where she is now? Today?

LUWIN: No, I don't.

BRAN: Then how can you promise me she'll be home soon?

LUWIN: Sometimes I worry you're too smart for your own good.

BRAN: I'll never shoot another arrow.

LUWIN: And where is that written?

BRAN: You need legs to work a bow.

LUWIN: hmm ... If the saddle Lord Tyrion designed actually works, you could learn to shoot a bow from horseback.

BRAN: Really?

LUWIN: Dothraki boys learn when they're four years old. Why shouldn't you?

[Winterfell - Theon Greyjoy's quarters. Theon and Ros (Theon's favorite local whore) are at the end of having sex.]

THEON: Shh ... Keep it down. You're not supposed to be inside the castle walls.

[Theon moves away and Ros walks over a dresser and sits in front of the mirror.]

ROS: I thought you were supposed to be an important person around here.

THEON: Important enough for the likes of you.

ROS: You're not the only nobleman in my life, you know.

THEON: Who? the Imp? I'd call him half a nobleman.

ROS: Jealous?

THEON: Why should I be jealous?

[Theon walks over and stands directly behind Ros.]

THEON: Anyone with a few coppers in his pocket can own you for the night. What's a dwarf like down below? I've always wondered.

ROS: Might surprise you.

THEON: hmm?

ROS: He's good with his fingers too. And his tongue.

THEON: (grabs the necklace around Ros's neck) Generous tipper. I guess gold is cheap for a Lannister.

ROS: You are jealous.

THEON: I'm a Greyjoy. We've been Lords of the Iron Islands for 300 years. There's not a family in Westeros that can look down on us, not even the Lannisters.

[King's Landing -- Arya Stark chases a cat along the castle hallways.]

ARYA: Come on. I'm not gonna hurt you.

[King's Landing -- Chambers of the Hand of the King -- Ned Stark is seated at his desk and listens to Lord Varys as he walks around securing the windows and doors before sitting down for a private conversation.]

VAYRS: How is your son, My Lord?

NED: He'll never walk again.

VAYRS: But his mind is sound?

NED: So they say.

VAYRS: A blessing then. I suffered an early mutilation myself. Some doors close forever ... others open in the most unexpected places. May I? (Varys indicates a chair and with a nod from Ned, sits down.)

VAYRS: If the wrong ears heard what I'm about to tell you, off comes my head. And who would mourn poor Varys then? North or South, they sing no songs for spiders. But there are things you must know. You are the King's Hand and the King is a fool ... your friend, I know, but a fool ... and doomed unless you save him.

NED: I've been in the capital a month. Why have you waited so long to tell me this?

VAYRS: I didn't trust you.

NED: So why do you trust me now?

VAYRS: The Queen is not the only one who has been watching you closely. There are few men of honor in the capital. You are one of them. I would like to believe I am another, strange as that may seem.

NED: What sort of doom does the King face?

VAYRS: The same sort as Jon Arryn. The tears of Lys, they call it. A rare and costly thing, as clear and tasteless as water. It leaves no trace.

[Ned quickly rises, turns his back to Varys and walks over to the open-air entrance to the balcony.]

NED: Who gave it to him?

VAYRS: Some dear friend, no doubt. But which one? There were many. Lord Arryn was a kind and trusting man. There was one boy ... all he was he owed to Jon Arryn.

NED: (turning to look at Vayrs) The squire, Ser Hugh?

VAYRS: Pity what happened to him, just when his life seemed to be going so nicely.

NED: If Ser Hugh poisoned him, who paid Ser Hugh?

VAYRS: Someone who could afford it.

[Ned walks back to his desk and places his hands on the chair back.]

NED: Jon was a man of peace. He was Hand for 17 years -- 17 good years. Why kill him?

VAYRS: He started asking questions.

[King's Landing -- Arya Stark chases the cat through the dungeons of the Red Keep. She stops suddenly and stares at a statue of a huge dragon's skull. As she explores, she hears two men approach. Quickly, she hides within the dragon's open jaws and listens. The men are Lord Varys and Magister Illyrio Mopatis.]

VAYRS: He's found one bastard already. He has the book. The rest will come.

ILLYRIO: And when he knows the truth, what will he do?

VAYRS: The gods alone know. The fools tried to kill his son. What's worse -- they botched it. (Varys closes and locks the corridor gate.) The wolf and the lion will be at each other's throats. We will be at war soon, my friend.

ILLYRIO: What good is war now? We're not ready. If one Hand can die, why not a second?

VAYRS: This Hand is not the other.

ILLYRIO: We need time. Khal Drogo will not make his move until his son is born. You know how these savages are.

VAYRS: "Delay," you say. "Move fast, " I reply. This is no longer a game for two players.

ILLYRIO: It never was.

[Arya watches as the men leave. She emerges from the dragon's jaws and runs to the gate, only to find it locked. She runs off in another direction.]

[King's Landing -- The Throne Room -- Littlefinger stands staring up at the Iron Throne when Lord Varys enters the room.]

VAYRS: The first to arrive and the last to leave. I admire your industry.

LITTLEFINGER: You do move quietly.

VAYRS: We all have our qualities.

LITTLEFINGER: You look a bit lonely today. You should pay a visit to my brothel this evening. First boy is on the house.

VAYRS: I think you're mistaking business with pleasure.

LITTLEFINGER: Am I? All those birds that whisper in your ear ... such pretty little things. Trust me, we accommodate all inclinations.

VAYRS: Oh, I'm sure. Lord Redwyne likes his boys very young, I hear.

LITTLEFINGER: I'm a purveyor of beauty and discretion -- both equally important.

VAYRS: Though I suppose beauty is a subjective quality, no? Is it true that Ser Marlon of Tumblestone prefers amputees?

LITTLEFINGER: All desires are valid to a man with a full purse.

VAYRS: And I heard the most awful rumor about a certain lord with a taste for fresh cadavers. Must be enormously difficult to accommodate that inclination. The logistics alone ... to find beautiful corpses before they rot.

LITTLEFINGER: Strictly speaking, such a thing would not be in accordance with the King's laws.

VAYRS: Strictly speaking.

LITTLEFINGER: Tell me. Does someone, somewhere, keep your balls in a little box? I've often wondered.

VAYRS: Do you know, I have no idea where they are? And we had been so close. But enough about me. How have you been since we last saw each other?

LITTLEFINGER: Since you last saw me or since I last saw you?

VAYRS: Now the last time I saw you, you were talking to the Hand of the King.

LITTLEFINGER: Saw me with your own eyes?

VAYRS: Eyes I own.

LITTLEFINGER: Council business. We all have so much to discuss with Ned Stark.

VAYRS: Everyone's well aware of your enduring fondness for Lord Stark's wife. If the Lannisters were behind the attempt on the Stark boy's life and it was discovered that you helped the Starks come to that conclusion ... To think a simple word to the Queen ...

LITTLEFINGER: One shudders at the thought.

VAYRS: Ooh. (shudders)

LITTLEFINGER: But you know something? I do believe that I have seen you even more recently than you have seen me.

VAYRS: Have you?

LITTLEFINGER: Yes. Earlier today, I distinctly recall seeing you talking to Lord Stark in his chambers.

VAYRS: Was that you under the bed?

LITTLEFINGER: And not long after that when I saw you escorting a certain foreign dignitary ... Council business? Of course you would have friends from across The Narrow Sea. You're from there yourself, after all. We're friends, aren't we, Lord Varys? I'd like to think we are. So you can imagine my burden, wondering if the King might question my friend's sympathies -- to stand at a crossroads where turning left means loyalty to a friend, turning right -- loyalty to the realm.

VAYRS: Oh, please.

LITTLEFINGER: To find myself in a position where a simple word to the King --

[Renly Baratheon, brother to King Robert, barges into the throne room, and speaks as he cuts across the room to another doorway on the other side.]

RENLY: What are you two conspiring about? Well, whatever it is, you'd best hurry up. My brother is coming. (exits)

LITTLEFINGER: To a small council meeting?

VAYRS: Disturbing news from far away. Haven't you heard?

[King's Landing --Arya emerges from a tunnel outside the castle walls. She makes her way to the entrance of the castle, but is stopped by two guards.]

GUARD1: Off with you. No begging.

ARYA: I'm not a beggar. I live here.

GUARD1: D'you want a smack on your ear to help you with your hearing?

ARYA: I want to see my father.

GUARD2: I want to fuck the Queen, for all the good it does me.

GUARD1: You want your father, boy? He's lying on the floor of some tavern, getting pissed on by his friends.

ARYA: My father is Hand of the King! I'm not a boy. I'm Arya Stark of Winterfell and if you lay a hand on me, my father will have both your heads on spikes! Now are you going to let me by or do I need to smack you on the ear to help with your hearing?

[King's Landing -- Hand of the King (Ned Stark) Chambers]

NED: You know I had half my guard out searching for you? You promised me this would stop.

ARYA: They said they were going to kill you.

NED: Who did?

ARYA: I didn't see them, but I think one was fat.

NED: Oh, Arya.

ARYA: I'm not lying! They said you found the bastard and the wolves are fighting the lions and the savage ... something about the savage.

NED: Where did you hear this?

ARYA: In the dungeons, near the dragon skulls.

NED: What were you doing in the dungeons?

ARYA: Chasing a cat.

JORY: (guard knocks, then enters) Pardon, My Lord. There's a Night's Watchman here begging a word. He says it's urgent. (Ned nods, the visitor enters.)

NED: Your name, friend?

YOREN: Yoren, if it please. This must be your son. He has the look.

ARYA: I'm a girl!

NED: Did Benjen send you?

YOREN: No one sent me, My Lord. I'm here to find men for The Wall, see if there's any scum in the dungeons that might be fit for service.

NED: Ah, we'll find recruits for you.

YOREN: Thank you, My Lord. But that's not why I disturb you now. Your brother, Benjen ... his blood runs black -- makes him as much my brother as yours. It's for his sake I rode here so hard I damn near killed my horse! There are others riding too. The whole city will know by tomorrow.

NED: Know what?

YOREN: Best said in private, My Lord.

NED: (kisses Arya on the head) Go on. We'll talk more later.

NED: Jory, take her safely to her room.

JORY: Come along, My Lady. You heard your father.

[Jory and Arya exit the chambers and walk down the hall]

ARYA: How many guards does my father have?

JORY: Here in King's Landing? Fifty.

ARYA: You wouldn't let anyone kill him, would you?

JORY: No fear on that count, little Lady.

[The Hand of the King's Chambers with door closed.]

NED: Well?

YOREN: It's about your wife, My Lord. She's taken the Imp.

[The Vale -- A short distance from The Eyrie, Catelyn Stark's party is met by a group of armed guards from The Vale.]

VARDIS: You're far from home, Lady Stark.

CATELYN: To whom do I speak?

VARDIS: Ser Vardis Egan, Knight of The Vale. Is Lady Arryn expecting your visit?

CATELYN: There was no time to send word.

VARDIS: May I ask, My Lady, why he is with you?

CATELYN: That's why there was no time. He is my prisoner.

VARDIS: He doesn't look like a prisoner.

CATELYN: My sister will decide what he looks like.

VARDIS: Yes, My Lady. She will at that.

[The Eyrie guards turn and head back to the castle. Catelyn Stark's party follows their escorts.]

TYRION: The Eyrie. They say it's impregnable.

BRONN: Give me 10 good men and some climbing spikes ... I'll impregnate the bitch.

TYRION: I like you.

[King's Landing -- Castle Courtyard -- The Royal Steward hails Ned Stark as he strides purposefully along a walk.]

STEWARD: Lord Stark, your presence has been requested in the small council chamber. A meeting has been called.

NED: I need to see the King first -- alone.

STEWARD: The King is at the small council meeting, My Lord. He has summoned you.

NED: Is it about my wife?

STEWARD: No, My Lord. I believe it concerns Daenerys Targaryen.

[King's Landing -- The Small Council Chamber -- present are: Ned Stark (who is standing and facing the others seated at the table), King Robert Baratheon, Renly Baratheon, Littlefinger, Lord Varys, Grand Maester Pycelle.]

KING ROBERT: The whore is pregnant.

NED: You're speaking of murdering a child.

KING ROBERT: I warned you this would happen. Back in the North, I warned you, but you didn't care to hear. Well, hear it now. I want 'em dead, mother and child both -- and that fool, Viserys as well. Is that plain enough for you? I want them both dead.

NED: you will dishonor yourself forever if you do this.

KING ROBERT: Honor?! I've got Seven Kingdoms to rule! One King, Seven Kingdoms. Do you think honor keeps them in line? Do you think it's honor that's keeping the peace? It's fear -- fear and blood.

NED: Then we're no better than the Mad King.

KING ROBERT: Careful, Ned. Careful now.

NED: You want to assassinate a girl ... because the Spider heard a rumor?

VARYS: No rumor, My Lord. The princess is with child.

NED: Based on whose information?

VARYS: Ser Jorah Mormont. He is serving as adviser to the Targaryens.

NED: Mormont? You bring us the whispers of a traitor half a world away and call it fact?

LITTLEFINGER: Jorah Mormont's a slaver, not a traitor. Small difference, I know, to an honorable man.

NED: He broke the law, betrayed his family, fled our land. We commit murder on the word of this man?

KING ROBERT: And if he's right? If she has a son? A Targaryen at the head of a Dothraki army ...What then?

NED: The Narrow Sea still lies between us. I'll fear the Dothraki the day they teach their horses to run on water.

KING ROBERT: Do nothing? That's your wise advice? Do nothing till our enemies are on our shores? You're my council. Counsel! Speak sense to this honorable fool.

VARYS: I understand your misgivings, My Lord. Truly, I do. It is a terrible thing we must consider, a vile thing. Yet, we who presume to rule must sometimes do vile things for the good of the realm. Should the gods grant Daenerys a son, the realm will bleed.

PYCELLE: I bear this girl no ill will, but should the Dothraki invade, how many innocents will die? How many towns will burn? Is it not wiser, kinder even, that she should die now so that tens of thousands might live?

RENLY: We should have had them both killed years ago.

LITTLEFINGER: When you find yourself in bed with an ugly woman, best close your eyes, get it over with. Cut her throat. Be done with it.

NED: I followed you into war -- twice -- without doubts, without second thoughts. But I will not follow you now. The Robert I grew up with didn't tremble at the shadow of an unborn child.

KING ROBERT: She dies.

NED: I will have no part in it.

KING ROBERT: You're the King's Hand, Lord Stark. You'll do as I command or I'll find me a hand who will.

[Ned removes the pin signifying his position as Hand of the King and tosses it onto the table in front of King Robert.]

NED: And good luck to him. I thought you were a better man.

KING ROBERT: Out! Out, damn you! I'm done with you. (Ned gives King Robert a slight nod, then turns and leaves.) Go! Run back to Winterfell! I'll have your head on a spike! I'll put it there myself, you fool! You think you're too good for this? Too proud and honorable? This is a war!

[King's Landing -- Ned Stark's chambers. Ned is quickly packing his belongings when Jory enters his room.]

NED: I'll go ahead with my daughters. Get them ready. Do it yourself. Don't ask anyone for help.

JORY: Right away, My Lord. Lord Baelish (Littlefinger) is here for you.

LITTLEFINGER: His Grace went on about you at some length after you took your leave. The word "treason" was mentioned.

NED: What can I do for you?

LITTLEFINGER: When do you return to Winterfell?

NED: Why? What do you care?

LITTLEFINGER: If you're still here come nightfall, I'll take you to see the last person Jon Arryn spoke with before falling ill. If that sort of thing still interests you.

NED: I don't have the time.

LITTLEFINGER: It won't take more than an hour. But as you please.

[Littlefinger turns and walks out into the hall, but he doesn't get very far before Ned grabs his sword and gives Jory some last orders before joining him.]

NED: Round up all the men we have and station them outside the girls' chambers. Who are your best two swords?

JORY: Heward and Wyl.

NED: Find them and meet me at the stables.

[The Eyrie -- The Throne Room -- Lysa Arryn, Catelyn's sister and widow to Jon Arryn, sits high upon her throne. Her son 7 year old son, Robin, still breast feeding, sits on her lap. Catelyn Stark, Tyrion Lannister, Ser Vardis Egan of the Vale and several guards stand in the hall, looking up at Lysa.]

LYSA: You bring him here without permission? You pollute my home with his presence? (To Robin) Your aunt has done a bad thing, Robin, a very bad thing. You remember her, don't you? (to Catelyn) Isn't he beautiful? And strong too. Jon knew it. His last words were, "the seed is strong." He wanted everyone to know what a good, strong boy his son would grow up to be. Look at him, the Lord of all the Vale.

CATELYN: Lysa, you wrote me about the Lannisters -- warning me t-

LYSA: To stay away from them! Not to bring one here!

ROBIN: Mommy? Is that the bad man?

LYSA: It tis.

ROBIN: He's little.

LYSA: He's Tyrion the Imp of house Lannister. He killed your father. He murdered the Hand of the King!

TYRION: Oh? Did I kill him too? I've been a very busy man.

LYSA: You will watch your tongue! These men are knights of the Vale. Every one of the loved John Arryn. Every one of them would die for me.

TYRION: If any harm comes to me, my brother, Jaime, will see that they do.

ROBIN: (jumping up and shouting) You can't hurt us! No one can hurt us here! Tell him, mommy! Tell him!

LYSA: Shh ... Shh ... Shh, my sweet boy. (Robin sits back down on his mother's lap.) He's just trying to frighten us. Lannisters are all liars. No one will hurt my baby.

ROBIN: Mommy ... I want to see the bad man fly.

LYSA: Perhaps you will, my little love.

CATELYN: This man is my prisoner. I will not have him harmed.

LYSA: Ser Vardis, my sister's guest is weary. Take him down below so he can rest. Introduce him to Mord.

["Down below", Mord throws Tyrion into his cell]

MORD: (laughing) You go sleep, dwarf man. Sleep good, little dwarf. man!

[Tyrion surveys his three-walled cell. Open sky greets him where the fourth wall should be. The floor slants toward the opening. Tyrion carefully walks over to the edge and looks down at the ground -- far -- far -- far below.]

[King's Landing -- Renly Baratheon's Chambers. Renly is seated in a chair and Ser Loras Tyrell (Knight of the Flowers) is kneeling beside him, preparing to shave Renly's chest.]

LORAS: Lord Stark's lucky he still has a head.

RENLY: Robert will rant for a few days, but he won't do anything. He adores the man.

LORAS: You're jealous.

RENLY: Are you sure this won't hurt?

LORAS: Only if I slip.

RENLY: And you prefer me like this?

LORAS: hm - mmm...

RENLY: If you want hairless, maybe you should find a little boy.

LORAS: I want you.

RENLY: My brother thinks that anyone who hasn't been to war isn't a man. He treats me as if I'm a spoiled child. Oh, and you're not? Loras Tyrell, the Knight of the Flowers? How many wars have you fought in? Oh, and how much did your father spend on that armor of yours?

LORAS: Hold still.

RENLY: All I ever hear from Robert and Stannis is how I'm not tough enough, how I squirm at the sight of blood.

LORAS: You did vomit when that boy's eye was knocked out in the mêlée.

RENLY: His eye was dangling out of the damn socket!

LORAS: He shouldn't have entered the mêlée if he didn't know how to fight.

RENLY: Easy for you to say. Not everyone is such a gifted swordsman.

LORAS: It's not a gift. No one gave it to me. I'm good because I work at it -- every day of my life since I could hold a stick.

RENLY: I could work at fighting all day, every day, and still never be as good as you.

LORAS: Yes well, I guess we'll never know.

[Loras wipes Renly's chest off and then raises Renly's arm to shave underneath it.]

RENLY: Everywhere?

LORAS: Everywhere. So how did it end up? The Targaryen girl will die?

RENLY: It needs to be done, unpleasant as it is. Robert's rather tasteless about it. Every time he talks about killing her, I swear the table rises six inches.

LORAS: It's a shame he can't muster the same enthusiasm for his wife.

RENLY: He does have a deep, abiding lust for her money. You have to give it to the Lannisters -- they may be the most pompous, ponderous cunts the gods ever suffered to walk the world, but they do have outrageous amounts of money.

LORAS: I have an outrageous amount of money.

RENLY: Not as much as the Lannisters.

LORAS: But a lot more than you.

RENLY: Robert's threatening to take me hunting with him. Last time we were out there for two weeks -- tramping through the trees in the rain, day after day. All so he can stick his spear into something's flesh! Oh. but Robert loves his killing. And he's the King.

LORAS: hmm ... How did that ever happen?

RENLY: Because he loves his killing and he used to be good at it.

LORAS: Do you know who should be King? (Both men exchange looks.)

RENLY: Be serious.

LORAS: I am. My father could be your bank. I've never fought in a war before, but I'd fight for you.

RENLY: I'm fourth in line.

LORAS: And where was Robert in the line of royal succession? Joffrey is a monster. Tommen is eight.

RENLY: Stannis?

LORAS: Stannis has the personality of a lobster.

RENLY: He's still my older brother.

[Loras slices a small cut in Renly's side.]

RENLY: What are you doing?!

LORAS: Look at it.

RENLY: You cut me!

LORAS: It's just blood. We've all got it in us. Sometimes a little spills. If you become King, you're going to see a lot of this. You need to get used to it. Go on. Look. People love you. They love to serve you because you're kind to them. They want to be near you.

[Loras rises and taking Renly by the hand, has him stand up as well.]

LORAS: You're willing to do what needs to be done, but you don't gloat over it. You don't love killing. Where is it written that power is the sole province of the worst? That thrones are only made for the hated and the feared. You would be a wonderful King.

[Loras kneels down in front of Renly, unfastens Renly's pants and slides them down. After a moment, Renly smiles with pleasure.]

[King's Landing -- King Robert's Chambers -- King Robert is seated at his desk, staring pensively at the drink in his hand when Cersei Baratheon enters.]

CERSEI: I'm sorry your marriage to Ned Stark didn't work out. You seemed so good together.

KING ROBERT: I'm glad I could do something to make you happy.

CERSEI: Without a Hand, everything will fall to pieces.

KING ROBERT: I suppose this is where you tell me to give the job to your brother Jaime.

CERSEI: No. He's not serious enough. I'll say this for Ned Stark -- he's serious enough. Was it really worth it? Losing him this way?

KING ROBERT: I don't know. But I do know this -- If the Targaryen girl convinces her horse-lord husband to invade and the Dothraki horde crosses The Narrow Sea ... we won't be able to stop them.

CERSEI: The Dothraki don't sail. Every child knows that. They don't have discipline. They don't have armor. They don't have siege weapons.

KING ROBERT: It's a neat little trick you do -- you move your lips and your father's voice comes out.

CERSEI: Is my father wrong?

KING ROBERT: Let's say Viserys Targaryen lands with forty thousand Dothraki screamers at his back. We hole up in our castles -- a wise move. Only a fool would meet the Dothraki in an open field. They leave us in our castles. They go from town to town, looting and burning, killing every man who can't hide behind a stone wall, stealing all our crops and livestock, enslaving all our women and children. How long do the people of the Seven Kingdoms stand behind their absentee King -- their cowardly King hiding behind high walls? When do the people decide that Viserys Targaryen is the rightful monarch after all.

CERSEI: We still outnumber them.

KING ROBERT: Which is the bigger number -- five or one?

CERSEI: Five.

KING ROBERT: (holds both hands up in illustration) Five ... one. One army, a real army, united behind one leader with one purpose. Our purpose died with the Mad King. Now we've got as many armies as there are men with gold in their purse. And everybody wants something different. Your father wants to own the world. Ned Stark wants to run away and bury his head in the snow.

CERSEI: What do you want?

KING ROBERT: We haven't had a real fight in nine years. Back-stabbing doesn't prepare you for a fight. And that's all the realm is now -- back-stabbing and scheming and arse-licking and money-grubbing. Sometimes I don't know what holds it together.

CERSEI: Our marriage.

[King Robert develops a hearty laugh as Cersei starts laughing as well.]

KING ROBERT: Ah, so here we sit, seventeen years later, holding it all together. Don't you get tired?

CERSEI: Every day.

KING ROBERT: How long can hate hold a thing together?

CERSEI: Well, seventeen years is quite a long time.

KING ROBERT: Yes, it is.

CERSEI: Yes, it tis. What was she like?

KING ROBERT: You've never asked about her, not once. Why not?

CERSEI: At first, just saying her name, even in private felt like I was breathing life back into her. I thought if I didn't talk about her, she'd just fade away for you. When I realized that wasn't going to happen, I refused to ask out of spite. I didn't want to give you the satisfaction of thinking I cared enough to ask. And eventually it became clear that my spite didn't mean anything to you, as far as I could tell, you actually enjoyed it.

KING ROBERT: So why now?

CERSEI: What harm could Lyanna Stark's ghost do to either of us that we haven't done to each other a hundred times over?

KING ROBERT: You want to know the horrible truth? I can't even remember what she looked like. I only know she was the one thing I ever wanted ... Someone took her away from me, and Seven Kingdoms couldn't fill the hole she left behind.

CERSEI: I felt something for you once, you know?

KING ROBERT: I know.

CERSEI: Even after we lost our first boy -- for quite a while, actually. Was it ever possible for us? Was there ever a time, ever a ... moment?

KING ROBERT: No. Does that make you feel better or worse?

CERSEI: It doesn't make me feel anything.

[King's Landing -- Littlefinger's Brothel -- Ned Stark is in a room with Mhaegen, a prostitute and mother of King Robert's illegitimate daughter, who she is holding. In an adjoining room, separated by a curtain of metal hoops, Littlefinger reclines on a sofa between two of his whores. Jory Cassel, Captain of Winterfell's Guard, stands opposite the sofa, next to the curtained doorway.]

MHAEGEN: She looks like him, don't she, My Lord? She has his nose, his black hair.

NED: Aye.

MHAEGEN: Tell him when you see him, My Lord. If it please you ... tell him how beautiful she is.

NED: I will.

MHAEGEN: And tell him I've been with no one else. I swear it, My Lord, by the old gods and new. I don't want no jewels or nothing, just him. The King was always good to me.

NED: When Jon Arryn came to visit you, what did he want?

MHAEGEN: He wasn't that sort of man, My Lord. He just wanted to know if the child was happy ... healthy.

NED: She looks healthy enough to me. The girl shall want for nothing.

[Ned leaves the room through the curtain and joins Littlefinger in the adjoining room.]

LITTLEFINGER: Brothels make a much better investment than ship, I've found. Whores rarely sink.

NED: What do you know of King Robert's bastards?

LITTLEFINGER: Well, he has more than you, for a start.

NED: How many?

LITTLEFINGER: Does it matter? If you fuck enough women, some of them will give you presents.

NED: And Jon Arryn tracked them all down. Why?

LITTLEFINGER: He was the King's Hand. Perhaps Robert wanted them looked after. He was overcome with fatherly love.

NED: (preparing to take his leave - to Jory) Come.

[Jory remains transfixed, staring at the whores on the couch as one of them bares her breasts.]

NED: Jory!

JORY: (startled out of his trance) My Lord.

[Ned and Jory exit the brothel and are joined by a handful of the Stark guard. They are swiftly surrounded by Jaime Lannister's armed guard. Jaime Lannister rides up on horseback to the head of the guard and faces Ned Stark]

JAIME: Such a small pack of wolves.

JORY: Stay back, Ser! This is the Hand of the King!

JAIME: Was! ... the Hand of the King. Now I'm not sure what he is ... Lord of somewhere very far away.

LITTLEFINGER: (exiting the brothel) What's the meaning of this, Lannister?
JAIME: Get back inside where it's safe. I'm looking for my brother. You remember my brother, don't you, Lord Stark? Blond hair, sharp tongue, short man.

NED: I remember him well.

JAIME: It seems he had some trouble on the road. You wouldn't know what happened to him, would you?

NED: He was taken at my command to answer for his crimes.

[Jaime draws his sword as his men start to move forward. They are stopped when Littlefinger steps up.]

LITTLEFINGER: My Lords! I'll bring the City Watch! (exits)

JAIME: Come, Stark. I'd rather you die sword in hand.

JORY: If you threaten My Lord again --

JAIME: Threaten? As in, "I'm going to open your Lord from balls to brains and see what Starks are made of"?

NED: You kill me, your brother's a dead man.

JAIME: You're right. (to his men) Take him alive! Kill his men!

[A short but fierce fight breaks out between the men. Outnumbered, Stark's men are felled one by one, ending with Jaime driving a dagger into Jory's eye. Ned Stark takes on Jaime while all remaining watch. Their sword fight is brought to an abrupt end when one of Jaime's guards spears the back of Ned's leg, bringing him to his knees. Angry, Jaime approaches the offending guard and knocks him out with one hard blow from the blunt end of his sword. Jaime mounts his horse and addresses Ned Stark.]

JAIME: My brother, Lord Stark ... we want him back.

[Jaime Lannister rides away as Ned Stark falls to his back on the ground.]



* Login   * Register 	* FAQ
Game of Thrones Transcripts
Share on facebook Share on twitter Share on email Share on print More Sharing Services 0

Forever Dreaming » Transcripts » Game of Thrones Transcripts




2x04 - Garden of Bones

  Page 1 of 1   [ 1 post ] 	New Topic Add Reply
  Print view 	Previous topic | First unread post | Next topic 
Author 	Message
 Offline bunniefuu 	
 2x04 - Garden of Bones
 Posted: Jun 25 13 3:52 PM Unread post
# 1 
User avatar
Administrator
Posts: 23443

Reply  
	
Does it ever end?

This is further east than I've ever been.

( Dany speaking Dothraki )

May I present my wife Margaery of House Tyrell?

You are very welcome here, Lady Stark.

If Robb Stark wants a pact with us, he should come himself.

My son is fighting a war, not playing at one.

I cannot defeat my brother in the field.

You must give yourself to the Lord of Light.

I've said the words, damn you.

( Whispers ) I will give you a son.

We've come to a dangerous place.

My sister wants to hurt me. She can't know about you.

Who are you?

I'm Shae, My Lady. Your new handmaiden.

I didn't know I needed a new handmaiden.

Catelyn: You fought bravely today, Lady Brienne.

I fought for my king. Soon I'll fight for him on the battlefield.

Die for him if I must.

( Flies buzz )

You told the Queen about my plans to send Myrcella to Dorne.

Never!

Throw him in one of the black cells.

Cersei: Myrcella is my only daughter.

Do you really think I'll let you sell her like a common whore?

It's done, Cersei.

No.

You cannot stop it.

No!

Not tonight.

There's another Tyrell who requires your attention.

I'm sorry.

Do you want my brother to come in and help?

I don't know what you're talking about.

There's no need for us to play games. Save your lies for court.

You're going to need a lot of them.

My brother Jaime rots in a northern stockade.

Robb Stark will never release the Kingslayer.

But his mother might.

How would you like to see your beloved Cat again?

Man: Outside!

Jaqen: Come here, boy!

Sweet boy, help us. Give it to me.

( Blades ring )

( Groans )

( Hilt thuds, Arya grunts )

Amory: Round up any survivors.

We'll take them back to Harrenhal.

We're looking for a bastard named Gendry.

You want Gendry? You already got him.

( Theme music playing )

♪ Game of Thrones 2x04 ♪ Garden of Bones Original Air Date on April 22, 2012 ♪

( Thunder rumbling )

( Horse neighs )

It's got to be the Mountain. He's the biggest.

He's the strongest.

Bulls are bigger than lions.

Doesn't mean I'd pick a bull in a fight.

If the bull had fangs and claws, I would.

Right, the Mountain or our man Jaime.

If he ever gets out.

( Thunderclap )

Loras Tyrell?

Loras Tyrell. He's prettier than the queen.

I don't care about pretty.

He's better with a sword than any of them.

How good could he be?

He's been stabbing Renly Baratheon for years, and Renly ain't dead.

( Laughs )

( Horse whinnies )

The horses seem a little spooked to you?

They're horses.

They get spooked by their own shadows.

Shh.

( Horse snorting )

Do you hear that?

No.

There's something out there.

( Neighing )

( Farts )

( Gasps )

( Laughing )

Oh.

Oh, you're a right little prick.

You should see your face.

I swear you pissed yourself.

"Oh, who goes there? Ahh!"

( Laughs )

There is something out there.

Yeah, don't even try me.

( Horse neighs )

Rennick.

Do you think I'm an idiot?

Rennick!

( Screams )

( Rennick screaming )

( Horses neighing )

Man: King in the North!

Men: The King in the North!

( Water running )

( Man groans )

( Flies buzzing )

( Man #2 screaming )

( Horse neighing )

( Man #3 shouting )

Bolton: Five Lannisters dead for every one of ours.

They're dead. Take everything they've got.

Bolton: We've nowhere to keep all these prisoners.

Barely enough food to feed our own.

We're not executing prisoners, Lord Bolton.

Of course, Your Grace.

The officers will be useful.

Some of them may be privy to Tywin Lannister's plans.

I doubt it.

Bolton: Well, we'll learn soon enough.

In my family we say, "A naked man has few secrets.

A flayed man none."

My father outlawed flaying in the North.

We're not in the North.

We're not torturing them.

The high road's very pretty, but you'll have a hard time marching your army down it.

The Lannisters hold prisoners of their own.

I won't give them an excuse to abuse my sisters.

Man: No, no, don't! Don't!

Woman: Shh, shh. Please!

Shh.

( Flies buzzing )

The rot's set in.

No, don't! No, don't!

Shh.

Please, don't!

It'll get better. It doesn't even hurt.

The rot will spread. If we don't take the foot now ...

No, you can't!

Ser! Please, Ser.

I can't lose ...

You'll die if she does it.

I don't want to be a cripple, please.

Surely one of our men needs your attention more than this cub.

Your men are not my men, My Lord.

Put this in your mouth and lie down. You don't want to watch.

No! You can't!

Bite on it.

It's better than biting your own tongue, believe me.

( Muffled screaming )

( Sawing )

What's your name?

Talisa.

Your last name?

You want to know what side my family fights on?

You know my family name. You have me at a disadvantage.

That boy lost his foot on your orders.

They killed my father.

That boy did?

The family he fights for.

Do you think he's friends with King Joffrey?

He's a fisherman's son that grew up near Lannisport.

He probably never held a spear before they shoved one in his hands a few months ago.

I have no hatred for the lad.

( Sighs )

That should help his foot grow back.

You'd have us surrender, end all this bloodshed.

I understand. The country would be at peace and life would be just under the righteous hand of good King Joffrey.

You're going to kill Joffrey?

If the Gods give me strength.

And then what?

I don't know.

We'll go back to Winterfell.

I have no desire to sit on the Iron Throne.

So who will?

I don't know.

You're fighting to overthrow a king, and yet you have no plan for what comes after?

First we have to win the war.

You never told me where you're from.

Volantis.

Volantis?

You're far from home.

The boy was lucky you were here.

He was unlucky that you were.

You're here to answer for your brother's latest treasons.

Your Grace, whatever my traitor brother has done, I had no part.

You know that. I beg you ...

Ser Lancel, tell her of this outrage.

Lancel: Using some vile sorcery, your brother fell on Stafford Lannister with an army of wolves.

( Crowd murmuring )

Thousands of good men were butchered.

After the slaughter, the northmen feasted on the flesh of the slain.

( Crowd gasping, murmuring )

Killing you would send your brother a message.

( Crying )

But my mother insists on keeping you alive.

Stand.

So we'll have to send your brother a message some other way.

Meryn.

Leave her face.

I like her pretty.

( Blow lands )

( Sansa gasps )

( Groans )

Meryn, My Lady is overdressed.

Unburden her.

If you want Robb Stark to hear us, we're going to have to speak louder.

( Sobbing )

Tyrion: What is the meaning of this?

What kind of knight beats a helpless girl?

The kind who serves his king, Imp.

Careful, now. We don't want to get blood all over your pretty white cloak.

Tyrion: Someone get the girl something to cover herself with.

She is to be your queen.

Have you no regard for her honor?

Joffrey: I'm punishing her.

Tyrion: For what crimes?

She did not fight her brother's battle, you half-wit.

You can't talk to me like that. The king can do as he likes!

The Mad King did as he liked.

Has your Uncle Jaime ever told you what happened to him?

No one threatens His Grace in the presence of the Kingsguard.

I'm not threatening the King, Ser.

I am educating my nephew.

Bronn, the next time Ser Meryn speaks, kill him.

That was a threat. See the difference?

( Crowd whispering )

Tyrion: I apologize for my nephew's behavior.

( Crowd murmuring )

Tell me the truth.

Do you want an end to this engagement?

I am loyal to King Joffrey, my one true love.

Lady Stark, you may survive us yet.

The little king's backed up.

Clogged from balls to brains.

You think dipping his wick will cure what ails him?

There's no cure for being a cunt.

But the boy's at that age.

And he's got nothing to do all day but pick wings off flies.

Couldn't hurt to get some of the poison out.

What are you doing here, dog?

Your uncle left your nameday present and asked me to see that you got it.

And?

What is it?

Look inside, Your Grace.

Your Grace.

Happy nameday, Your Grace.

My nameday has passed.

We won't tell if you won't.

No.

Her.

Touch her.

( Women giggle )

( Breathing heavily )

Could you hit her?

( Laughs )

My uncle sent you?

Yes, Your Grace.

He chose us himself.

Hmm.

( Slapping )

( Laughing )

Use this.

Harder.

( Whimpers )

I said harder.

He'd want me to get his money's worth.

( Crying )

( Screaming )

( Whimpering, crying )

Your Grace, too much pain will spoil the pleasure.

( Woman whimpering )
Please, please, please, Your Grace.

Your Grace, if your uncle finds out ...

Oh, I want him to find out.

You will bring her to his chambers when you're finished and show him what you've done.

Or the same thing will happen to you.

Begin.

( Thuds )

( Screams )

Harder!

( Horse whinnies )

Well, if it isn't my favorite whoremonger.

Pray I haven't kept you waiting long.

Your Grace.

Now you do the Lannisters' bidding, is that it?

Tell me, was my brother's body even cold before you secured your newest patron?

I'm a practical man.

Just not a loyal one.

And who would you have me be loyal to?

Your brother's corpse?

( Chuckles )

I don't like you, Lord Baelish.

I don't like your face.

I don't like the words that come oozing out of your mouth.

I don't want you in my tent one minute more than necessary.

So tell me, why are you here?

Renly: You can trust Brienne.

Her loyalty comes without charge.

You still have many friends at court, Your Grace, many who believe Ned Stark erred by not supporting your claim.

Now I understand.

You know I have the numbers.

You know I'm marching on King's Landing.

When I take the throne, you hope to retain your position.

And your head.

I would give priority to my head.

I understand that you don't like me, and while that saddens me greatly, I did not come here today seeking your affection.

When you march on King's Landing, you may find yourself facing a protracted siege or... open gates.

Your Grace.

Lord Baelish.

All of these tents look the same to me.

Would you be so kind ...

It would be my pleasure.

It took me weeks to learn way around the camp.

Twice I walked in on officers in stages of undress.

And the moment I learn which tent is mine, we're on the move again.

Your tent?

Not our tent?

The King snores, perhaps?

Or simply prefers solitude?

Pressures of command, no doubt.

Four kings vying for the throne.

I am not tutored in warfare, but basic arithmetic favors the side with the greater numbers.

If war were arithmetic, the mathematicians would rule the world.

But I did notice your brother entering His Grace's tent the just now.

The place of a Kingsguard is by the King's side.

And on the night of the your wedding, who was by the King's side then?

You seem quite interested in our marriage.

Your marriage is quite interesting...

Not only to me, but to the realm.

The marriage of a wealthy girl always breeds interest, if nothing else.

You've never married, have you?

I've been unlucky in my affections, sadly.

That is sad.

Though perhaps it's for the best.

The whole notion of marriage seems to confuse you, so allow me to explain.

My husband is my King, and my King is my husband.

Here is your tent, Lord Baelish. Good night.

( Hoofbeats )

( Horse whinnies )

( Speaking Dothraki )

What do you know of this place?

Only that the desert around their walls is called the Garden of Nes.

Every time the Qartheen shut their gates on a traveler, the garden grows.

( Man coughing )

( Man #2 groans )

Man #3: Go on!

Man #4: You, keep moving!

( Woman crying )

( Screams )

Man: Bring her about!

What kind of fire melts stone?

Dragon fire.

There's dragons here?

No, all the dragons are dead.

What's that smell?

Dead people.

Move.

Man: Please, please, no, no!

( Screaming )

( Screaming )

( Sobbing )
No.

( Screaming )

( Screaming stops )

( Chains rattle )

( Heavy thud )

Woman: He's dead.

He was my son.

My sister was three days ago.

My husband, the day before that.

They take someone every day?

Does anyone live?

( Thunder rumbling )

Arya: Joffrey.

Cersei.

Ilyn Payne.

The Hound.

Joffrey.

Cersei.

Ilyn Payne.

The Hound.

Joffrey. Cersei.

Ilyn Payne. The Hound.

How dare you?

You may have heard false reports.

You betrayed Ned.

Betrayed?

I wanted him to serve as Protector of the Realm.

I begged him to seize the moment.

I trusted you. My husband trusted you.

And you repaid our faith with treachery.

No, My Lady.

Get out!

Cat, I've ...

I've loved you since I was a boy.

It seems to me that fate has given us this chance ...

Have you lost your mind? Get out!

Do you want to see your girls again?

Sansa, more beautiful than ever.

And Arya, just as wild as ever.

You have Arya, too?

Both girls are healthy and safe... for now.

But you know the Queen and you know Joffrey.

I fear for their longevity if they remain in the capital.

( Knife clinks )

What do you want?

The Lannisters will trade your daughters for the Kingslayer.

Of course they will.

Jaime Lannister for two girls?

Robb will never agree to those terms.

I'm not bringing these terms to him.

I'm bringing them to you.

You think I'd keep secrets from my son?

Robb has surprised them all with his skills in battle, but he's not a mother.

Consider it, Cat.

You may not get another chance.

I've brought you a gift.

I don't want your gifts.

A token of Tyrion Lannister's goodwill.

He wants you to understand that this exchange of prisoners is offered in good faith.

Good faith?

What's this?

Your husband was an honorable man.

He should rest beside his family in the crypts beneath Winterfell.

You may not believe ...

Get out.

( Groans )

( Men shouting )

Man: Get up, you dogs!

( Wood banging )

That's him, the one who picks.

The Mountain.

What are you doing?

He told me he stares at him every day.

That's why he doesn't get picked.

You.

Man: Move, boy!

Move!

( Liquid trickling )

Tickler: Is there gold and silver in the village?

I don't know.

Gems?

I didn't see any.

Where is the Brotherhood?

I don't know.

( Rats squeaking )

( Squeaking )

Tickler: Where is the Brotherhood?

I don't know. Please.

Where is the Brotherhood?

I don't know.

( Rat squeaking )

( Whimpering )

Which of the villagers aided them?

I don't know.

Who?

I ...

Who?

I never saw.

Who?

I never saw.

Please. Please, stop. Please, it's starting to ...

Who?

I didn't see anyone help him.

( Rat shrieking )

Take it off! Take it off!

Who helped him?

Ganes the butcher and his son.

That's better.

You've been very helpful.

No, stop, please!

What are you doing?

Please, stop!

Please, stop!
No! No!

I told you everything! No!

No! ( Screaming )

( Rat clattering )

Joffrey.

Cersei.

Ilyn Payne. The Hound.

Woman: Please, Polliver.
Some food.

Just a crust of bread.

( Woman crying )

Polliver.

The Mountain.

Lady Stark, I had not thought to find you in the Stormlands.

I had not thought to be here, Lord Stannis.

Can that truly be you?

Who else might it be?

When I saw your standard, I couldn't be sure.

Whose banner is that?

My own.

I suppose if we used the same one, the battle would be terribly confusing.

Why is your stag on fire?

The King has taken for his sigil the fiery heart of the Lord of Light.

Ah, you must be this fire priestess we hear so much about.

Mm, brother, now I understand why you found religion in your old age.

Watch yourself, Renly.

Renly:
No, no, I'm relieved.

I never really believed you're a fanatic.

Charmless, rigid, a bore, yes, but not a godly man.

You should kneel he's the Lord's chosen, born amidst salt and smoke.

Born amidst salt and smoke?

Is he a ham?

Stannis: That's twice I've warned you.

Listen to yourselves.

If you were sons of mine, I would knock your heads together and lock you in a bedchamber until you remembered that you were brothers.

It is strange to find you beside my brother, Lady Stark.

Your husband was a supporter of my claim.

Lord Eddard's integrity cost him his head.

And you sit beside this pretender and chastise me.

We share a common enemy.

The Iron Throne is mine by right.

All those that deny that are my foes.

The whole realm denies it, from Dorne to the Wall.

Old men deny it with their death rattle and unborn children deny it in their mother's wombs.

No one wants you for their King.

You never wanted any friends, brother.

But a man without friends is a man without power.

For the sake of the mother who bore us, I will give you this one night to reconsider.

Strike your banners, come to me before dawn, and I will grant you your old seat in the council.

I'll even name you my heir until a son is born to me.

Otherwise I shall destroy you.

Look across those fields, brother.

Can you see all those banners?

You think a few bolts of cloth will make you King?

No.

The men holding those bolts of cloth will make me King.

We shall see, Renly.

Come the dawn, we shall see.

Look to your sins, Lord Renly.

The night is dark and full of terrors.

Would you believe I loved him once?

I thought we were welcome.

If you heard a Dothraki horde was approaching your city, you might do the same, Khaleesi.

Horde?

My name is Daenerys ...

Daenerys Stormborn of the House Targaryen.

You know me, My Lord?

Only by reputation, Khaleesi.

And I'm no lord, merely a humble merchant.

They call you the Mother of Dragons.

And what should I call you?

Oh, my name is quite long and quite impossible for foreigners to pronounce.

I am simply a trader of spices.

But we are the Thirteen, charged with the governance and protection of Qarth, the greatest city that ever was or will be.

The beauty of Quarth is legendary ...

Qarth.

Qarth.

Might we see the dragons?

My friend, we have travelled very far.

We have no food, no water.

Once I see my people fed, I would be honored ...

Forgive me, Mother of Dragons, but no man alive has seen a living dragon.

Some of my more skeptical friends refuse to believe your children even exist.

All we ask is the chance to see for ourselves.

I am not a liar.

Oh, I don't think you are.

But as I've never met you before, my opinion on the matter is of limited value.

Where I come from, guests are treated with respect, not insulted at the gates.

Then perhaps you should return to where you come from.

We wish you well.

What are you doing?

You promised to receive me.

We have received you.

Here we are, and here you are.

If you do not let us in, all of us will die.

Which we shall deeply regret.

But Qarth did not become the greatest city that ever was or will be by letting Dothraki savages through its gates.

Khaleesi, please be careful.

Thirteen!

When my dragons are grown, we will take back what was stolen from me and destroy those who have wronged me.

We will lay waste to armies and burn cities to the ground.

Turn us away and we will burn you first.

Ah.

You are a true Targaryen.

Only, as you said a moment ago, Retreating in fear from a little girl is unbecoming of the greatest city that ever was or will be.

The discussion is over, Xaro Xhoan Daxos.

The Thirteen have spoken.

I am one of the Thirteen and I am still speaking.

The girl threatens to burn our city to the ground and you would invite her in for a cup of wine?

She is the Mother of Dragons.

Do you expect her to watch her people starve without breathing fire?

I believe we can allow a few Dothraki through our gates without dooming our city.

After all, here I am, a savage from the Summer Isles, and Qarth still stands.

Our decision is final.

Very well.

I invoke Soumai.

I will vouch for her, her people, and her dragons in accordance with the law.

Be it on your head.

Welcome to Qarth, My Lady.

Mountain: You.

Tickler: Is there gold or silver in the village?

I'm not from the village.

Where is the Brotherhood?

I don't know what that is.

( Squeaking )

( Horses neigh )

Man: You two, take Lord Lannister's things to his quarters.

What's this?

We weren't expecting you till tomorrow, Lord Tywin.

( Chuckles ) Evidently not.

Why are these prisoners not in their cells?

Mountain: Cells are overflowing,
My Lord.

Polliver: This lot won't be here long.

Don't need no permanent place.

After we interrogate 'em, we usually just...

Are we so well-manned that we can afford to discard able young bodies and skilled laborers?

You, do you have a trade?

Gendry: Smith, My Lord.

What are you looking at? Kneel!

Kneel or I'll carve your lungs out, boy.

He'll do no such thing.

This one's a girl, you idiot, dressed as a boy.

Why?

Safer to travel, My Lord.

Smart.

More than I can say for this lot.

Get these prisoners to work.

Bring the girl.

I need a new cupbearer.

Mountain: My Lord.

( Knocking on door )

Your visits are too few, cousin.

Her Grace, the Queen Regent, commands you to release Grand Maester Pycelle.

Here's your warrant.

So it is.

Will you take a cup with me?

I find that mulled wine helps me sleep.

I am here at Her Grace's behest, not to drink with you, Imp.

If my sister was so concerned for Pycelle, I would have thought she'd come herself.

Instead she sends you.

What am I to make of that?

I don't care what you make of it, so long as you release your prisoner immediately.

And you've received these instructions directly from Cersei?

As I said several times.

And you've waited this long to deliver the information?

When the Queen Regent gives me a command, I carry it out without delay.

Cersei must have great trust in you, allowing you into her chamber during the hour of the wolf.

The Queen Regent has a great many responsibilities.

She often works from dusk till dawn.

She must be very glad to have you helping her from dusk till dawn.

Ah, lavender oil.

She always loved lavender oil, even as a girl.

I am a knight!

An anointed knight, yes.

Tell me, did Cersei have you knighted before or after she took you into her bed?

What? Nothing to say?

No more warnings for me, Ser?

You will withdraw these filthy accusations.

Have you ever given any thought to what King Joffrey will have to say when he finds out you've been bedding his mother?

It's not my fault!

Did she take you against your will?

Can you not defend yourself, knight?

Your own father, Lord Tywin, when I was named the King's squire, he told me to obey her in everything.

Did he tell you to fuck her, too?

I only meant I did as I was bid.

Hated every moment of it, is that what you'll have me believe?

A high place in court, a knighthood, my sister's legs spreading open for you at night.

Oh, yes, it must have been terrible.

Wait here. His Grace will want to hear this.

Mercy! Mercy, My Lord! I beg you.

Save it for Joffrey. He loves a good grovel.

My Lord, it was your sister's bidding ... the Queen.

I'll leave the city at once, I swear.

No, I think not.

My Lord?

You heard me.

My father told you to obey my sister.

Obey her.

Stay close to her side. Keep her trust.

Pleasure her whenever she requires.

No one ever need know as long as you keep faith with me.

I want to know what Cersei is doing, where she goes, who she sees, what they talk of ... everything.

And you will tell me.

Yes, My Lord, I will.

I swear it, as you command.

Oh, rise, rise.

Let us drink to our understanding.

Oh, you don't have a cup. Oh, well.

Smile, cousin. My sister is a beautiful woman.

And it's all for the good of the realm.

Go back and tell her that I beg her forgiveness, that I want no more conflict between us and that henceforth I shall do nothing without her consent.

But her demands.

Oh, I'll give her Pycelle.

You will?

Yes, I'll release him in the morning.

Cersei can keep him as a pet if she wants, but I will not have him on the council.

I could swear that I had not harmed a single hair on his head, but that would not, strictly speaking, be true.

( Wood creaking )

( Waves crashing )

Man: Stay within one table length.

Your Grace.

Do your knucklebones bring you luck?

Well, life's been good since you hacked them off, Your Grace.

And it's four less fingernails to clean.

Fewer.

Pardon?

Four fewer fingernails to clean.

Never understood why you had to wear them.

It reminds me of where I come from and where I am now.

It reminds me of your justice.

It was an honest punishment and you were good with the cleaver.

You were a hero and a smuggler.

A good act does not wash out the bad, nor a bad the good.

A lesson I've tried to teach my son.

Does he listen?

To me?

Gods, no.

But if your red woman told him to leap from the crow's nest ...

She has a name.

I trust you've not forgotten your smuggler's tricks.

I've lived within the law for 17 ...

I want you to be a smuggler this time.

Any shore, any night.

What am I bringing ashore?

The red woman.

No one must know what you do and we'll not speak of this again.

I am true to Your Grace and always will be, but surely there are other ways, cleaner ways.

Cleaner ways don't win wars.

Are you afraid, onion knight?

Someone once told me the night is dark and full of terrors.

You've carried more unpleasant cargo in your time.

Are you a good man, Ser Davos Seaworth?

I'd say my parts are mixed, My Lady ... good and bad.

If half an onion is black with rot, it's a rotten onion.

A man is good or he is evil.

And which are you?

Oh, good.

I'm a knight myself of sorts, a champion of light and life.

Well, that must be very nice for you.

Do you love your wife?

I do.

Yet you have known other women.

Don't talk about my wife.

I'm not. I'm talking about other women.

Like me, Ser Davos.

You want me.

You want to see what's beneath this robe.

And you will.

Strange that this Lord of Light asks you to work in the shadows.

Shadows cannot live in the dark, Ser Davos.

They are servants of light, the children of fire.

And the brighter the flame, the darker they are.

These weren't here before. They've barred the passage.

( Chuckles )

They can't bar our passage.

Gods protect us.

There's only one God, Ser Davos, and he only protects those who serve him.



* Login   * Register 	* FAQ
Game of Thrones Transcripts
Share on facebook Share on twitter Share on email Share on print More Sharing Services 0

Forever Dreaming » Transcripts » Game of Thrones Transcripts




3x02 - Dark Wings Dark Words

  Page 1 of 1   [ 1 post ] 	New Topic Add Reply
  Print view 	Previous topic | First unread post | Next topic 
Author 	Message
 Offline bunniefuu 	
 3x02 - Dark Wings Dark Words
 Posted: Jun 24 13 8:56 PM Unread post
# 1 
User avatar
Administrator
Posts: 23443

Reply  
	
Mance: Why do you want to join us, Jon Snow?

I saw Craster take his own baby boy and leave it in the woods.

I saw what took it.

When I told the Lord Commander, he already knew.

I want to fight for the side that fights for the living.

How did you kill those guards?

Show me how.

If you would learn, you must come with me.

I want to, but I need to find my brother and mother.

And my sister.

You have to go. Go to the Wall, to Jon.

Osha, you must protect them.

You're the only one who can.

Karstark: 200 Northmen slaughtered like sheep.

The debt will be repaid, my friend.

For them and for your sons.

They rot in the ground while their killer runs free.

Those were Stark men.

I don't serve the Starks. I serve Lady Catelyn.

I told you I'd take you to King's Landing, and that's what I'm going to do.

Cersei: Joffrey tells me you stopped your carriage at Flea Bottom this morning.

Margaery: I paid a visit to an orphanage the High Septon told me about.

Not long ago we were attacked by a mob there.

The king barely escaped with his life.

My mother's always had a penchant for drama.

Facts become less and less important to her as she grows older.

You said you'd take me home.

If you were to tell just one...

Please, Lord Baelish, tell me what to do.

Tell me when.

Ros: Watch out for her.

Watch out for her with him.

( snarls )

Sam: Ah!

( Ghost growling )

We need to get back to the Wall.

We know what's out there, but we have to warn them.

( theme music playing )

( panting )

( wind blowing )

( caws )

( caws )

Don't think too much, Bran.

Relax your bow arm.

( caws )

( laughing )

Ned: And which one of you was a marksman at 10?

Father?

( raven caws )

You can't kill it, you know.

Why not?

Because the raven is you.

( raven caws )

( gasps )

Hodor.

It's all right, Hodor.

( sighs ) Hodor.

Osha: Were you inside the wolf again, little lord?

No, it was the three-eyed raven.

He's back.

I tried to kill it, but I couldn't.

There was a boy.

I don't want to hear about it.

But you asked.

We've got plenty of worries.

We don't need to pour black magic on top of them.

I didn't ask for black magic dreams.

I know you didn't, little lord.

( birds screeching )

We need to move.

We don't know who might be after us.

No one even knows we're alive.

And who told you that?

The three-eyed raven tell you?

No.

Some good he is, then.

I don't know what other people know and what they don't.

I only know the Wall is a long way off.

My mother always told me you Westerosi were a grim lot.

Grim, bearded, stinking barbarians that would row across the Narrow Sea and steal us from our beds.

Did you ever think you'd marry one?

I never thought I'd marry anyone at all.

Never?

Not until I met the king of the grim, bearded, stinking barbarians.

( door opens )

Pardon me, Your Grace.

My queen.

Lord Bolton.

Let me guess which one is the good news.

Word from Riverrun and Winterfell.

( crying ) I hadn't seen him in years.

I don't even know how many.

We'll travel to the funeral together.

Lord Bolton will garrison here until we return.

Will I be wearing manacles when I lay my father to rest?

Something else?

By the time Bolton's bastard got to Winterfell, the ironborn were gone.

They massacred everyone and put the castle to the torch.

And Bran and Rickon have not been found.

They may have escaped.

Or Theon may have taken them back to the Iron Islands as hostages.

Have you received any demands?

Have you heard anything from Theon at all?

( gasps )

( shivering )

Where am I?

Who are you?

What do you want?

I want to do this.

( screaming )

Do you know how long it's going to take us to get to King's Landing walking through fields and forests?

Yes.

( sheep bleating )

So how shall we pass the time?

By putting one foot in front of the other.

It's going to be a very dull walk.

I'm here to take you to King's Landing and bring back Lady Stark's daughters in exchange.

Dull is fine.

You know, it doesn't matter how loyal a servant you are, no one enjoys the company of a humorless mute.

Trust me on this.

People have been serving me since I was born.

You think Lady Stark is going to want a giant towheaded plank following her around for the rest of her life?

A week's journey with you and she'll order you to fall on your sword.

If Lady Stark is unhappy with any aspect of my service, I'm sure she'll let me know.

She's an honest woman.

All the good it's done her.

( moans )

How did you come into Lady Stark's service?

There's something we can talk about.

Not your concern, Kingslayer.

It had to be recently.

You weren't with her at Winterfell.

How would you know?

Because I visited Winterfell.

I would have noticed your dour head smacking into the archways.

Move.

Were you pledged to Stannis?

Gods, no.

Ah, Renly.

Really?

He wasn't fit to rule over anything more important than a 12-course meal.

Shut your mouth.

Why?

I lived with him at court since he was a boy, don't forget.

Could hardly escape the little tulip.

Skipping down the corridors in his embroidered silks.

I knew him far better than you.

I knew him as well as anyone.

As a member of his Kingsguard, he trusted me with everything.

He would have been a wonderful king.

Sounds like you quite fancied him.

I did not fancy him.

Oh, gods, you did.

Did you ever tell him?

No, of course not.

You weren't Renly's type, I'm afraid.

He preferred curly-haired little girls like Loras Tyrell.

You're far too much man for him.

I'm not interested in foul rumors.

Unless they're about me.

It's all true about Renly.

His proclivities were the worst kept secret at court.

It's a shame the throne isn't made out of cocks.

They'd have never got him off it.

Shut your mouth!

I don't blame him.

And I don't blame you, either.

We don't get to choose who we love.

( horse snorts )

Where are you headed, then?

Jaime: South.

You?

Riverrun.

Staying off the kingsroad, are you?

They get you no matter where you go.

You can't win.

No, you really can't.

Looks like you're safe enough, though.

Meaning no offense, my lady, but...

( laughs ) I wouldn't tangle with you.

( laughs )

Seven blessings to you.

And you.

Jaime: He knows who I am.

He doesn't.

Maybe you're right.

But what if you're not? What if he tells someone?

We're not doing it.

He's an innocent man.

More innocent than Lady Stark's daughters?

Make it tighter here.

That's better.

It makes you look very strong.

No flowers.

I said no flowers.

All these are wrong. Bring others.

Yes, Your Grace.

Bloody flowers.

On the king.

Looks like a Tyrell rose.

Give it to Margaery for her wedding gown.

Should be more than enough fabric.

Tell me what you think of her.

Who?

Margaery.

She's an ideal match.

With the Tyrells beside us, we'll crush the Northerners.

Hang their lords, burn their strongholds, sow their fields with salt, and no one will think of rebelling for another century.

It is a good match, but what do you think of her?

She's beautiful and intelligent.

Yes, she is.

Her concern with the well-being of the common people is interesting.

Not to me.

( chuckles )

I only meant that to go out of your way to endanger yourself ...

This is becoming one of the most boring conversations I've ever had.

Margaery Tyrell dotes on filthy urchins for a reason.

She dresses like a harlot for a reason.

She married a traitor and known degenerate like Renly Baratheon for a reason.

She married Renly Baratheon because she was told to.

That's what intelligent women do ... what they're told.

You need to ask yourself ...

I don't need to do anything.

( sighs )

Better.

Much better.

I still don't believe it.

He didn't. He didn't want anything.

He just takes an interest because he loved my mother.

Men only want one thing from a pretty girl.

Littlefinger's not in love with me.

Love is not the thing he wants.

He's too old.

They never see it that way.

He didn't ask you to do something for him?

Spy on someone or...?

No.

If he does ask you for anything or try anything or touch you, I want you to tell me.

Why? What will you do?

I will make him stop.

( knocks )

Guard: Ser Loras Tyrell, my lady.

Send him in.

Lady Sansa.

Ser Loras.

My sister Margaery invites you to take the air with her and our grandmother the Lady Olenna in the gardens.

May I escort you to them?

I believe you grow more beautiful every day, Lady Sansa.

You are too kind, Ser Loras.

You probably don't remember the first time we met.

At the Hand's tourney, you gave me your favor.

A rose, a red rose.

Of course I did.

Margaery: It's more your color.

You take it.

Thank you.

You're such a dear.

I'll take my leave.

Lady Sansa.

Thank you, Ser Loras.

Come.

Lady Sansa, it is my honor to present my grandmother... the Lady Olenna of House Tyrell.

Kiss me, child.

It's so good of you to visit me and my foolish flock of hens.

We're very sorry for your losses.

And I was sorry when I heard of Lord Renly's death, Lady Margaery.

He was very gallant.

Gallant, yes.

And charming and very clean.

He knew how to dress and smile and somehow this gave him the notion he was fit to be king.

Renly was brave and gentle, Grandmother.

Father liked him and so did Loras.

Loras is young and very good at knocking men off horses with a stick.

That does not make him wise.

As to your fathead father ...

Grandmother! What will Sansa think of us?

She might think we have some wits about us.

One of us, at any rate.

It was treason. I warned them.

Robert has two sons and Renly has an older brother.

How could he possibly have any claim to that ugly iron chair?

We should have stayed well out of all this if you ask me.

But once the cow's been milked, there's no squirting the cream back up her udders.

So here we are to see things through.

What do you say to that, Sansa?

Shall we have some lemon cakes?

Lemon cake's my favorite.

So we've been told.

Are you going to bring the food or do you mean to starve us to death?

Here, Sansa, come sit with me.

I'm much less boring than these others.

Do you know my son?

The Lord of Highgarden?

I haven't had the pleasure.

No great pleasure, believe me.

A ponderous oaf.

His father was an oaf as well.

My husband, the late Lord Luthor.

He managed to ride off a cliff whilst hawking.

They say he was looking up at the sky and paying no mind to where his horse was taking him.

And now my son is doing the same, only this time he's riding a lion instead of a horse.

Now...

I want you to tell me the truth about this royal boy, this Joffrey.

I... I...

You, you.

Who else would know better?

We've heard some troubling tales.

Is there any truth to them?

Has this boy mistreated you?

Has he ripped out your tongue?

Joff ... King Joffrey, he ... His Grace is very fair and handsome and as brave as a lion.

Yes, all Lannisters are lions.

And when a Tyrell farts, it smells like a rose.

But how kind is he?
How clever?

Has he a good heart, a gentle hand?

I'm to be his wife.

I only want to know what that means.

( footsteps approaching )

Bring me some cheese.

The cheese will be served after the cakes, my lady.

The cheese will be served when I want it served.

And I want it served now.

Are you frightened, child?

No need for that.

We're only women here.

Tell us the truth. No harm will come to you.

My father always told the truth.

Yes, he had that reputation.

And they named him traitor and took his head.

Joffrey.

Joffrey did that.

He promised he would be merciful and he cut my father's head off.

And he said that was mercy.

Then he took me up on the walls and made me look at it.

Go on.

I ... I can't. I never meant ... my father was a traitor.

My brother as well. I have traitor's blood.

Please don't make me say anymore.

She's terrified, Grandmother.

Just look at her.

Speak freely, child.

We would never betray your confidence, I swear it.

He's a monster.

Ah.

That's a pity.

Please, don't stop the wedding.

Have no fear. The Lord Oaf of Highgarden

is determined that Margaery shall be queen.

Even so, we thank you for the truth.

Ah, here comes my cheese.

( panting )

Karstark: We're at war.

This march is a distraction.

My grandfather's funeral is not a distraction.

Are we riding to battle at Riverrun?

No.

Then it's a distraction.

My Uncle Edmure has his forces garrisoned there.

We need his men.

Unless he's been breeding them, he don't have enough to make a difference.

Have you lost faith in our cause?

If it's revenge, I still got faith in it.

If you no longer believe ...

I can believe till it snows in Dorne.

Don't change the fact that we've got half the men.

You don't think we can win?

May I speak my mind, Your Grace?

Have you not been speaking your mind, Lord Karstark?

I think you lost this war the day you married her.

( horse whinnies )

Whoa, whoa.

Your Grace.

You're afraid of her.

And she knows it.

I'm not afraid of her.

( snorting )

May I help you, Lady Stark?

No.

I'm sorry, I shouldn't have ...

You can't help because a mother makes one for her children to protect them.

Only a mother can make them.

You've made them before?

Twice.

Did they work?

After a fashion.

I prayed for my son Bran to survive his fall.

Many years before that, one of the boys came down with the pox.

Maester Luwin said if he made it through the night, he'd live.

But it would be a very long night.

So I sat with him all through the darkness.

Listened to his ragged little breaths, his coughing, his whimpering.

Which boy?

Jon Snow.

When my husband brought that baby home from the war, I couldn't bear to look at him.

I didn't want to see those brown stranger's eyes staring up at me.

So I prayed to the gods, take him away.

Make him die.

He got the pox.

And I knew I was the worst woman who ever lived.

A murderer.

I'd condemned this poor, innocent child to a horrible death all because I was jealous of his mother.

A woman he didn't even know.

So I prayed to all seven gods, let the boy live.

Let him live and I'll love him.

I'll be a mother to him.

I'll beg my husband to give him a true name, to call him Stark and be done with it, to make him one of us.

And he lived.

And he lived.

And I couldn't keep my promise.

And everything that's happened since then...

all this horror that's come to my family... it's all because I couldn't love a motherless child.

Was it hard for you to kill the Halfhand?

Yes.

You liked him?

I like you, but if you're playing us false, it won't be hard for me to kill you.

I've got wildling blood in my veins.

These are my people.

I understand.

Well, how could you understand?

You want to protect your people.

Do you know what it takes to unite 90 clans, half of whom want to massacre the other half for one insult or another?

They speak seven different languages in my army.

The Thenns hate the Hornfoots.

The Hornfoots hate the ice-river clans.

Everyone hates the cave people.

So you know how I got moon worshippers and cannibals and giants to march together in the same army?

No.

I told them we were all going to die if we don't get south.

Because that's the truth.

Shouldn't be long now.

( screeching )

What's wrong with him?

Mance: He's a warg.

He can enter the mind of animals, see through their eyes.

He's scouting for us.

What, you've never met a warg?

( screeching )

Mance: Orell.

( shivers )

Where were you this time?

The Fist of the First Men.

What did you see?

( chuckles )

Dead crows.

( men coughing )

Rast: What's the matter, Piggy?

You crying 'cause you're cold?

There's 200 brothers killed by dead men and you're still here whimpering.

That seem fair to you?

I seen 'em torn to pieces fighting while you was off somewhere hiding in a hole.

Why don't you lie down and rest for a while, eh?

You know you want to.

Hey.

Get up, Sam.

No.

Get up.

I can't.

If you stop, you'll die.

'Course if you don't stop, you'll probably die, too.

You don't care.

'Course we care.

You left me.

When the white walkers came, you left me.

Aye, we left you.

You're fat and you're slow.

We didn't want to die.

( Sam sobbing )

Help me get him up.

Looks like that piggy is done for.

Help us get him up.

He's slowing us down.

Just get him up!

Why? So the rest of us can die?

We'll move faster without him.

What is this? Get up, Tarly.

Is he all right?

Aye, I think so.

If he can't, we may as well just go without him.

That's enough.

Tarly, I forbid you to die.

Do you hear me?

Why should the rest of us ...

Rast... you're responsible for him.

What am I supposed to do?

Make sure he gets back alive.

If he doesn't, you don't.

Move on!

I'm not dying for you, Piggy.

You hear me?

( branch snaps )

( wolf growling )

Where's Rickon and Hodor?

Looking for food.

( growling )

What's out there?

( growling )

( growling )

Osha: Not another step, boy.

Unless you want to drown in your own blood.

I'm unarmed.

That was poor planning.

My sister carries the weapons.

I'm better with them.

Drop the spear.

Drop it.

If you kill me, that wolf will tear you to bits.

( growling )

You must be Summer.

( sniffing )

I'm Jojen Reed.

This is my sister Meera.

We've come a long way to find you, Brandon.

And we have much farther to go.

Gendry: I'm just trying to understand.

Arya: Would you please shut up about it?

Jaqen H'ghar offered you three kills.

I'm not listening.

But just explain it to me.

He offered to kill any three people you wanted.

Dead. All you had to do was give him the names.

Anyone. You could have picked King Joffrey.

Shut up.

You could have picked Tywin Lannister.

Jaqen got us out of Harrenhal, so why are you complaining?

But you could have ended the war.

Where are we going?

North.

If we were going north, we should have come to the Red Fork River by now.

Maybe we already passed it.

It's 100 feet wide.

How could we have passed it?

If we hit the Red Fork, we can follow it west to Riverrun.

My mother grew up there.

My grandfather's a lord. He'll protect us.

( man singing )

Could be a minstrel.

Shut up.

♪ A lion still has claws... ♪

Hot Pie: A minstrel's got gold sometimes.

We could jump him, tie him up, steal his gold, and buy some food.

Shh.

♪ And so he spoke, and so he spoke ♪

♪ That Lord of Castamere ♪

♪ But now the rains ♪

♪ Weep o'er his hall ♪

♪ With no one there to hear. ♪

( gasps )

Singer: What's lurking behind that wall?

A lion?
A wolf?

Archer: Just a dirty little cub, I think.

Singer: Loose a few more shafts.

Don't.

Put the sword down, girl.

You go on down the road.

Just keep on singing so we know where you are.

Leave us be and I won't kill you.

( laughing )

Generous.

You're a dangerous person.

I like dangerous people.

Why are your friends so shy?

What friends?

The fat one to your left and the lad beside him.

Three young ones on the run carrying castle-forged swords.

You escape from Harrenhal?

Arya: Who are you?

Thoros of Myr.

And the fellow here with the bow is Anguy.

No, who do you fight for?

The Brotherhood without Banners.

Now come along.

I want to hear how two boys and a very dangerous girl escaped Harrenhal.

I'm not going with them. The Brotherhood?

That's who the Mountain and them lot were looking for.

They'll bring us back and put rats in us.

You've got nothing to fear from us, son.

The lords of Westeros want to burn the countryside.

We're trying to save it.

Now come on.

We'll talk some more over brown bread and stew.

And then you can go on your way.

Here's the thing, fat boy.

When I'm done talking, that arrow's falling down on your fat head.

So I advise you move, because I'm done talking.

( men laughing )

Half the country's starving and look at this one.

Maybe he's the reason half the country's starving.

My lion.

We've spoken of this.

You cannot come here.

But you said I should come to you with any problems.

Did anyone see you?

No.

You sure?

My father does not make idle threats.

Having you killed would be the high point of his week.

You have to be absolutely certain.

All right.

What is this problem?

I'm worried about Sansa.

When she spoke with Lord Baelish, his friend warned me about him.

Baelish doesn't have friends.

I don't know her name.

Oh, Ros? The redhead?

How do you know her?

I try to know as many people as I can.

You never know which one you'll need.

She's a whore.

Yes, well, we shouldn't be judgmental about these things.

You fucked her.

Oh, please.

All right, yes, I fucked her once.

Twice.

But since I met you, my lady, I've been with no one else.

And was she good? Did you like her?

Not as much as I like you, obviously, or she'd be the one torturing me right now.

What did she say about Littlefinger?

That Sansa shouldn't trust him.

Is there an idiot in any village who trusts Littlefinger?

We have to protect her.

We can't.

Now that the Lannisters have discarded her, Sansa will have many suitors.

A great beauty with a very old name.

A great beauty? Oh, a great beauty?

Yes, she is, objectively, very.

Her face is quite pleasing ... to other men and to women, people in general.

But not to me, of course.

I only have eyes for you.

You pervert. You want her?

This child?

I don't even want to talk about her.

But you are.

Only because you're making me.

( chuckles ) I didn't force you to open your mouth and make words come out.

This is cruel and unfair. Cruelly unfair.

"Oh, the cruelty.

Shae is so cruel to me."

Hmm, yes.

Now do you think I'm cruel?

Only if you stop.

But you mustn't come here again.

Do you hear me?

You've come to a dangerous place full of dangerous people.

Dangerous people.
( moans )

( knocks )

Guard: Lady Tyrell, my king.

Send her in.

You wanted to see me, Your Grace?

I'm leaving on a hunting trip.

I just wanted to make sure you had everything you need before I left.

That's very thoughtful, Your Grace.

I have everything I could want.

Good. Good.

How are you finding life in the capital?

It must be quite a change after Renly's camp.

A welcome one.

A military encampment is no place for a lady.

And the bedside of a traitor?

Is that a place for a lady?

Your Grace, I tried to do my duty as a wife, that is all.

What was your duty to this traitor as you saw it?

The duty of any wife to any husband ... to provide him with children.

You failed to do this.

Why?

I ...

I would not speak ill of the dead, Your Grace.

You think one ought to speak kindly of a traitor merely because he's had a sword put through his heart?

No.

I do beg your pardon.

The subtleties of politics are often lost on me.

Renly...

I don't believe he was interested

in the company of women.

What makes you say this?

Whenever I wanted to make a child with him, he ... he had so many excuses, so many late-night war councils.

He never wanted to try.

Except one evening, after he'd had far too much wine to drink, he suggested something ... something that sounded very painful and couldn't possibly result in children.

Maybe the fault was with me.

No, he was a known... degenerate.

It's such a relief to hear you say so, Your Grace.

Mmm.

I've considered making his perversion punishable by death.

As is your right.

You must do whatever you need to do.

You are the king.

Yes.

I am.

Do you like it?

I just had it made.

Probably one of the finest weapons in the Seven Kingdoms.

It's beautiful.

Will you show me how it works?

It's a new design.

Much easier to load. There's no crank.

You use this lever to draw the string.

The bolt goes here.

And then you just aim... and...

( laughs )

Would you take me hunting sometime?

Forgive me, Your Grace.

I know a hunt is no place for a woman.

It's not unheard of.

My father would never let me before ...

You no longer belong to him.

Do you want to hold it?

May I? Please.

I imagine it must be so exciting to squeeze your finger here and watch something die over there.

Could you do it?

Could you... kill something?

I don't know, Your Grace. Do you think I could?

Yes.

Would you like to watch me?

Yes.

( screams ) Stop! Stop!

Tell us the truth.

About what?

( screams ) I don't know what you want.

I want the truth.

What truth?

Why'd you take Winterfell?

I took it to ... I took it ...

Who gave the orders?

No one.

I took it on my own.

Why?

To take the North while it was vulnerable.

What were you going to do once you took it?

Hold it. Rule it.

Good. That's very good.

( screams )

Why did you do that? I told you.

Why did you take Winterfell?

I took it to bring glory to my house and my father.

Wait. Wait, wait, wait.

I took it because I hated the Starks.

I hated them for holding me prisoner.

I wanted to hurt them.

What are you doing?

Please.

( screaming )

I'll tell you anything.

Just take it off.

Please. Please, just take it off.

( door closes )

Your sister sent me.

Yara?

( whimpers )

I'll come for you tonight when the castle sleeps.

No, don't go. Please, please.

No, please don't leave me.

Please, please.

Please, please don't go!

( sobbing ) Please. Please. Don't leave me.

Please don't go.

Rickon, stay with us.

It's all right. The wolves will protect him.

You can get inside his head, see through his eyes.

Only when I'm asleep.

That's how it begins until you learn to control it.

You're a warg.

It's not just wolves.

Sometimes in my dreams there's a ...

A three-eyed raven?

You've seen it?

We saw him together. You haven't forgotten?

Does it have anything to do with warging?

No, the raven is something different, something deeper.

The raven brings the sight.

Seeing things that haven't happened yet?

Or things that happened long before you were born or things that are happening right now thousands of miles away.

What's he telling him?

Why don't you ask?

Isn't he ashamed, your brother, needing you to protect him?

Where's the shame in that?

Any boy his age who needs his sister to protect him is gonna find himself needing lots of protecting.

Some people will always need help.

That doesn't mean they're not worth helping.

When my father died, I dreamt it.

You didn't dream it. You saw it.

So did I.

You have the sight, too?

When I told my father about your father... for the first time in my life, I saw him cry.

Your father is Howland Reed?

Yeah.

He saved my father's life during the rebellion.

Your father told you about the rebellion?

Mine never did.

But I saw that, too.

What else have you seen?

Only one thing that matters ... you.

( men laughing )

Thoros: I never liked the skinny ones.

Like drinking from a puddle.

Not that I'm averse to drinking from a puddle every now and again, you understand.

I don't drink ale.

There's no story so good a drink won't make it better.

Yeah!

You see?

They've all suffered through my bouts of sobriety.

It's very tedious for all concerned.

Now, how did three children ...

We're not children.

How did three young persons such as yourselves, untrained in the art of war, escape from Harrenhal?

Gendry's a smith.

He was apprenticed in the armory.

A smith, eh? Where'd you train?

King's Landing. Tobho Mott's shop.

That criminal. He charges twice as much as every other armorer in the city.

That's because he's twice as good.

Aha! A smith and a salesman.

Gendry stole us weapons.

Ah, fought your way out of Harrenhal, I see.

He knows how to use a sword and so do I.

( men laugh )

My brothers taught me.

( men laugh )

Men: Ooh!

( men cheer )

To your brothers!

( cheering )

You can finish your meals before you go.

It may be awhile before you see another.

You'll free us?

I gave you my word.

But before you go, allow me to raise a cup to your ...

Hey, hey.

( men cheering )

Now that is an uncommonly large person.

How does one manage to subdue such an uncommonly large person?

One waits for him to drink until he passes out.

Poor man. You have my sympathy.

Aha, not a man at all.

A Hound!

( men howl and bark )

So good to see you again, Clegane.

Thoros?

The fuck you doing here?

Drinking and talking too much.

Same as ever.

( men laugh )

A pretty prize, lads.

Men: Yeah!

Girl.

What in seven hells are you doing with the Stark bitch?

Jaime: It's a tough decision ... take the bridge and risk being seen or cross the great water.

Silence, Kingslayer.

Anyone can see us on the bridge, but cross by water and the current could take us or I could escape down the river.

Good luck.

It's wonderful to watch you wrestle with these dilemmas.

Which will she choose?

Gambler at heart.

Wouldn't have guessed.

Be quick about it.

( Jaime groans )

I need to rest.

Get up.

I have these, you know, on your feet when you walk too far.

What do you call them?

Get up now.

Corns. I never used to get corns.

Of course I used to ride everywhere, not march around like a common foot soldier wearing the same shit boots for over a year.

This heel is ruined. There's no way ...

( grunts )

( chuckles )

I never understood why some knights felt the need to carry two swords.

( sighs )

Ooh.

You move well... for a great beast of a woman.

You shouldn't grimace before you lunge.

It gives away the game.

Bit of a quandary for you.

If you kill me, you fail Lady Stark.

But if you don't kill me,

I'm going to kill you.

You're good.

Graceless, but good.

See? If you were willing to hurt me, you might have had me there.



Looks like your woman's getting the better of you, if you can call that a woman.

We enjoy a good fight.

Gets our juices flowing.

The Flayed Man of House Bolton.

A bit gruesome for my taste.

You sure he's the one?

That's him, all right.

I saw him fight at the tourney for Ser Willem Frey's wedding.

Give the man his silver.

Let us go and my father will pay you whatever you want.

Enough to buy me a new head?

If the King in the North hears I had the Kingslayer and let him go, he'll be taking it right off.

I'd rather he takes yours.


* Login   * Register 	* FAQ
Game of Thrones Transcripts
Share on facebook Share on twitter Share on email Share on print More Sharing Services 0

Forever Dreaming » Transcripts » Game of Thrones Transcripts




3x07 - The Bear and the Maiden Fair

  Page 1 of 1   [ 1 post ] 	New Topic Add Reply
  Print view 	Previous topic | First unread post | Next topic 
Author 	Message
 Offline bunniefuu 	
 3x07 - The Bear and the Maiden Fair
 Posted: Jun 08 13 9:55 AM Unread post
# 1 
User avatar
Administrator
Posts: 23443

Reply  
	
Lothar: Our father has instructed us to tell you that his alliance with the North can continue
if his terms are met.

Lord Frey requires Lord Edmure to wed one of his daughters.

It's hard to say which of the four of us is getting the worst of this arrangement.

Probably Sansa.

Though Loras will certainly come to know a deep and singular misery.

Cersei: Who's going to tell her?

Good afternoon, Lord Tyrion.

I was just trying on a gown for King Joffrey's wedding.

Yes, it should be quite a wedding.

Roose: I will allow you to go to King's Landing as restitution for the mistakes my soldiers made.

And you will swear to tell your father that I had nothing to do with your maiming.

- My lady.
- She won't be going with you.

Let's play a game.

Which body part do you need the least?

( screaming )

- How many times has the Lord brought him back? - Six.

He sent you to us for a reason.

You have someone He needs.

You told me I could be one of you.

You told me this was a brotherhood.

You will make kings rise and fall.

The visions take their toll.

He's having one now?

- I saw Jon Snow.
- At Castle Black?

He was on the wrong side of the Wall, surrounded by enemies.

( wind howling )

( both grunting )

( theme music playing )

3x07 The Bear and the Maiden Fair
( screeches )

Ygritte: How far are we?

About a week, I think.

You think? You don't know?

Jon: When we went to Castle Black, we took the kingsroad.

( scoffs ) You and your roads.

Is that how you lot do your fighting?

You march down the road banging drums and waving banners?

Most of the time, yes.

How do the men holding the banners fight?

They don't, really.

It's a great honor to carry your house sigil.

And the drummers-- is that a great honor, too?

Usually it's the young boys banging the drums.

So what good are they?

- They help the men march.
- How?

Well, it's-- it's the rhythm.

Oh, you mean right foot, left foot, right foot, left foot, right foot?

You need help remembering that?

When Mance gives the signal and we hit Castle Black, we won't be banging on drums to let them know we're coming.

No.

No, you're just gonna light the biggest fire the North has ever seen to let them know you're coming.

You know nothing, Jon Snow.

Orell: She's right, you don't.

I know you cut me loose on the Wall.

Cut her loose, too.

Do you see her sulking about it?

That's because she understands the way things are.

And are you gonna share it with me?

The deep wisdom you found inside the head of a bird?

People work together when it suits them.

They're loyal when it suits them.

They love each other when it suits them.

And they kill each other when it suits them.

She knows that, you don't.

Which is why you'll never hold onto her.

( thunder rumbling )

That rain will cost us another day.

Frey will wait. He knows we're coming.

Lord Walder is prickly by nature.

Prickly? That what you call it?

Might be the least pleasant man I've ever met.

- Yes, and that is why--
- I've seen wet shits

I liked better than Walder Frey.

Apologies, Your Grace.

Spent too many years around lancers and pikemen.

I've spent the last two years nursing wounded men, watching them bleed and die.

I'm not afraid of wet shits.

( laughs )

Lord Frey will take this delay as a slight.

He can take it as he likes.

He's getting the wedding he wanted.

He's getting a wedding.

It was a king he wanted.

Robb: Edmure is the best match a Frey has had in the history of their house.

We should all get some sleep.

( heavy breathing )

If you don't put some clothes on, I can't promise I won't attack you again.

Attack. Attack.

Who are you writing?

My mother.

- Is that Valyrian?
- Gaaa.

Gaaa?

( sighs )

Say hello for me.

Rytsas.

- "Ritsas."
- ( laughs )

That was close enough.

Does she know her daughter's a queen?

Not yet.

That will be a surprise, I expect.

Many surprises for her.

How am I supposed to sit here planning a war when you're over there looking like that?

Will you come with me one day to Volantis?

When all this is over?

I will.

I promise.

I know she'd love to meet you.

And her grandchild.

What, now?

Are you certain?

Are you angry with me?

Angry?

You're my queen.

And I have your little prince or princess inside me.

Maybe one of each.

Don't get greedy.

( laughing )

Can you leave the war for one night?

I love you.

Do you hear me?

I love you.

( thunder rumbles )

Tormund: Most men fuck like dogs.

( grunting )

No grace, no skill.

A few dozen thrusts and done.

You need to be patient. Give her time.

Your cock shouldn't go near her till she's slick as a baby seal. And then you go inside, but slowly.
Don't jam it in like you're spearing a pig.

( laughs )
Come on!

( laughs )
Hey, come on.

Orell: You think he loves you, is that it?

What did he tell you? He's gonna make you his lady and live with you in some castle?

No, he didn't tell me anything. He barely talks.

I've seen you two whispering in the night, giggling like a pair of girls.

What, you're jealous?

Of course I'm jealous.

You should be with one of your own.

And you're one of my own?

I've never heard a kind word from your mouth.

You would if you were mine.

I'd tell you that you're beautiful and fierce and wild. I'd be good to you. You love him?
'Cause he's pretty? Is that it? You like his pretty hair and his pretty eyes?

- You think pretty is gonna make you happy?
- Don't touch me.

You won't love him so much when you find out what he really is.

Growing up at Winterfell, all I ever wanted was to escape, to come here to the capital.

See the southern knights and their painted armor and King's Landing after dark-- all the candles burning
in all those windows. I'm stupid.

A stupid little girl with stupid dreams who never learns.

Come on. Come walk with me.

I remember the first time I saw you in the throne room.

I'd never seen anyone who looked so unhappy.

I want very much for you to be happy, Sansa, and so does my grandmother.

You would have been happy at Highgarden.

But women in our position must make the best of our circumstances.

How do I make the best of my circumstances?

I have to marry him.

- Has Lord Tyrion mistreated you?
- No.

Has he been kind to you?

He's tried.

You don't want him, though.

He's a Lannister.

Far from the worst Lannister, wouldn't you say?

I'm sorry.

Here I am complaining to you...

My son will be king.

Sons learn from their mothers.

I plan to teach mine a great deal.

And your son, if I'm not mistaken, your son might be the Lord of Casterly Rock and the North someday.

What?

My son...

with him.

I'll have to--

we'll have to--

If it's the pain you're worried about--

I'm not afraid of the pain.

Not after what Joffrey's done to me.

What is it, then?

He's rather good-looking even with the scar.

Especially with the scar.

He's a dwarf.

And Loras--

Loras.

Some women like tall men. Some like short men.
Some like hairy men. Some like bald men.
Gentle men, rough men, ugly men, pretty men, pretty girls.

Most women don't know what they like until they've tried it.

And, sadly, so many of us get to try so little before we're old and gray.

Tyrion may surprise you.

From what I've heard, he's quite experienced.

And that's a good thing?

It can be.

We're very complicated, you know.

Pleasing us takes practice.

How do you know all this?

Did your mother teach you?

Yes, sweet girl. My mother taught me.

Tyrion: She's a child.

Bronn: She's a foot taller than you.

A tall child.

What's the youngest you've ever had?

Not that young.

How much older?

Older.

You're a lord, she's a lady.

And a beauty at that.

I don't see the problem.

Shae isn't going to like it.

Shae is a whore.

Are you gonna marry her? Eh?

How did marrying a whore work out for you the first time?

I should never have told you about that.

You want Shae, keep her. Wed one and bed the other.

All you have to do is get a son in the Stark girl.

He'll be Lord of Winterfell one day.

You can rule the North in his name.

You'll have two women and a whole kingdom of your own.

Two women to despise me and a whole kingdom to join them.

You waste time trying to get people to love you, you'll end up the most popular dead man in town.

( chuckling )

You want to fuck that Stark girl.

You just don't want to admit it.

I don't pay you to put evil notions in my head.

The ones already there don't need company.

You pay me to kill people who bother you.

Evil notions come free.

( doors close )

Your Grace.

Grandfather.

You wanted to speak to me?

Yes.

I'd like a report on the meetings of my small council.

You're welcome to attend the meetings of your small council, Your Grace.

Any or all of them.

I've been very busy.

Many important matters require a king's attention.

Of course.

You've been holding the council meetings in the Tower of the Hand instead of the small council chamber.

I have, yes.

May I ask why?

The Tower of the Hand is where I work.

To walk from there to here would take time, time I could otherwise spend productively.

So if I wanted to attend a council meeting, I would now have to climb all the stairs in the Tower of the Hand?

We could arrange to have you carried.

Tell me about the Targaryen girl in the east and her dragons.

Where did you hear about this?

Is it true?

Apparently so.

Don't you think we ought to do something about it?

When I was Hand of the King under your father's predecessor, the skulls of all the Targaryen dragons
were kept in this room.

The skull of the last of them was right here.

It was the size of an apple.

And the biggest was the size of a carriage.

Yes, and the creature to whom it belonged died 300 years ago.

Curiosities on the far side of the world are no threat to us.

But how do we know these dragons are just curiosities and not the beasts that brought the whole world to heel?

Because we have been told as much by the many experts who serve the realm by counseling the king on matters about which he knows nothing.

But I haven't been counseled.

You are being counseled at this very moment.

I should be consulted about such things.

From now on, I will see to it that you are appropriately consulted on important matters whenever necessary.

Your Grace.

Yunkai.

The Yellow City.

Barristan: The Yunkish train bed slaves, not soldiers.

We can defeat them.

On the field, with ease.

But they won't meet us on the field.

They have provisions, patience, and strong walls.

If they're wise, they'll hide behind those walls and chip away at us, man by man.

I don't want half my army killed before I've crossed the Narrow Sea.

We don't need Yunkai, khaleesi.

Taking this city will not bring you any closer to Westeros or the Iron Throne.

How many slaves are there in Yunkai?

200,000, if not more.

Then we have 200,000 reasons to take the city.

( drum beating )

( drumming stops )

Now comes the noble Razdal mo Eraz of that ancient and honorable house, master of men and speaker to savages,

- to offer terms of peace.
- ( dragons screech )

Noble lord, you are in the presence of Daenerys Stormborn of House Targaryen, Queen of the Andals and the First Men, Khaleesi of the Great Grass Sea, Breaker of Chains, and Mother of Dragons.

You may approach.
Sit.

Will the noble lord take refreshment?

Ancient and glorious is Yunkai.

Our empire was old before dragons stirred in old Valyria.

Many an army has broken against our walls.

You shall find no easy conquest here, khaleesi.

( screeching )

Good. My Unsullied need practice.

I was told to blood them early.

If blood is your desire, blood shall flow.

But why?

'Tis true you have committed savageries in Astapor.

But the Yunkai are a forgiving and generous people.

The wise masters of Yunkai have sent a gift for the silver queen.

There is far more than this awaiting you on the deck of your ship.

- My ship?
- Yes, khaleesi.

As I said, we are a generous people.

You shall have as many ships as you require.

And what do you ask in return?

All we ask is that you make use of these ships. Sail them back to Westeros where you belong and leave us to conduct our affairs in peace.

I have a gift for you as well.

- Your life.
- My life?

And the lives of your wise masters.

But I also want something in return. You will release every slave in Yunkai. Every man, woman, and child
shall be given as much food, clothing, and property as they can carry as payment for their years of servitude. Reject this gift, and I shall show you no mercy.

You are mad.

We are not Astapor or Qarth.

We are Yunkai and we have powerful friends.

Friends who would take great pleasure in destroying you.

Those who survive, we shall enslave once more.

Perhaps we'll make a slave of you as well.

( screeching )

You swore me safe conduct.

I did, but my dragons made no promises. And you threatened their mother.

Take the gold.

( screeching )

My gold. You gave it to me, remember?

And I shall put it to good use.

You'd be wise to do the same with my gift to you.

Now get out.

( speaking Valyrian )

The Yunkish are a proud people.

They will not bend.

And what happens to things that don't bend?

He said he had powerful friends.

Who was he talking about?

I don't know.

Find out.

( screeches )

( purring )

Chains?

Solid gold from the mines outside Lannisport.

Smithed in Casterly Rock.

Golden chains.

You could buy a ship with these.

- Do I need a ship?
- What?

- Am I going somewhere?
- Of course you're not going anywhere.

So, am I invited to your wedding?

I didn't ask for this marriage.

- I didn't want it.
- No?

She's a beautiful girl. You said so yourself.

That doesn't mean that-- this is duty, not desire.

Is that what you will tell yourself when you fuck her?

I don't have a choice.
My father-- Does not rule the world.

We can still go across the Narrow Sea.

What would I do there?

Juggle?

I am a Lannister of Casterly Rock.

And I'm Shae the funny whore.

My feelings for you have not changed.

I will marry Sansa Stark and do my duty by her.

While I empty her chamber pot and lick your cock when you're bored?

I swear to you it will not be like that.

No?
What will it be like?

I will buy you a good home somewhere in the city.

You will have fine clothes, guards to keep you safe, servants.

Any children we might have will be well provided for.

Children?
You think I want children who can never see their father?

Who would be killed in their sleep if their grandfather found out about them?

Listen.

Listen to me, my lady.

- I'm not your lady.
- You are.

You'll always be my lady.

I'm your whore.

And when you are tired of fucking me, I will be nothing.

( seabirds calling )

- What happened?
- Wildfire.

I should have been here.

After all the running and fighting, here I am, back where I started.

Do you miss it?

- King's Landing?
- Your father's house.

Never had a father.
Never wanted one.

Haven't you ever wondered where your strength came from?

Your talent for fighting?

I'm lowborn.

As low as can be.
My mother was a tavern wench.

Mine was a slave.

So was I.

Bought and sold, scourged and branded, until the Lord of Light reached down,
took me in his hand and raised me up.

I was born in Flea Bottom.

Your blood is noble.

Are you saying my father, he was some lord or... There.

Your father's house.

I'm just a bastard.

The bastard of Robert of the House Baratheon, First of His Name, King of the Andals and the First Men.

Why do you think the gold cloaks wanted you?

There is power in a king's blood.

Come sit by the fire, child.

Not talking, eh?

That's a first.

I don't talk to traitors.

I didn't like giving up the boy.

But you did.

You took the gold and you gave him up.

The Red God is the one true god.

You've seen his power.

When he commands, we obey.

He's not my one true god.

No?
Who's yours?

Death.

- ( men chattering )
- ( man coughing )

Spotted a Lannister raiding party.

- How many?
- No more than 20.

- How far?
- Less than a day's ride south.

What do you say, boys?
Time for a lion hunt?

Men: Yeah!

But what about Riverrun?

It's not south.
It's west of here.

It will still be west of here two days from now.

- You swore.
- To take you home, and I will.

But we need to do this first.

Why? So you can steal their gold?

I swear to you, this isn't--

I don't care what you swear because you're a liar.

You lied to Gendry, you lied to me.

You'll lie to anyone. I hope the Lannisters kill you all.

One day you'll understand, but now--

- Anguy, bring her back.
- Man: Come back, girl!

( gasps )

Kick all you like, wolf girl.

Won't do you no good.

( door opens )

I thought you were gone.

Tomorrow.

Have they told you what they plan to do with me?

Lord Bolton's traveling tomorrow as well.

He's going to the Twins for Edmure Tully's wedding.

You're to remain here.

With Locke?

I owe you a debt.

When Catelyn Stark released you, we both made a promise to her.

Now it's your promise.

You gave your word.

Keep it and consider the debt paid.

I will return the Stark girls to their mother.

I swear it.

Good-bye, Ser Jaime.

( grunting )

Here.
Let me.

It will take time.

Qyburn hopes your father will force the Citadel to give him back his chain.

My father will make him Grand Maester if he grows me a new hand.

You will give my regards to Lord Tywin, I trust?

Tell Robb Stark I'm sorry I couldn't make his uncle's wedding.

The Lannisters send their regards.

Safe journey, Kingslayer.

Nothing to say?

I liked you better before.

I don't remember chopping your balls off, too.

And don't you worry about your friend.

We'll take good care of her.

Shh.

( Theon groaning )

Gentle, my lord.

- ( gasping )
- Gentle.
- ( Theon coughs )
- Shh shh shh.

Myranda knows what she's doing.

Let her.

She trained as a septa, only...

( giggles )

she had other urges.

So did the Septons, only they lied about it.

Where is he?

Who, my lord?

There's no one here but you, me, and Violet.

Please.

Don't you want us to see it?

Oh, come on.
Let us see it.

Everybody talks about it.

He sent you.

Who sent us?

We sent ourselves, Lord Greyjoy.

We heard so much about it.

( giggles )

- Please.
- Oh!

There it is.

Oh.

Do you think we're ugly?

He thinks we're ugly.

Well, he's been through so much.

Look at his poor face.

Help me.

If he comes back...

We need to make him feel better.

And how can we make him feel better?

I have an idea.

Oh, she's shy.

You know how they are, these religious girls.

Maybe he doesn't know how we are.

Oh.

I felt something.

Oh, Lord Greyjoy.

- As good as they say?
- Mmm.

( breathing heavily )

And why should you get all the fun?

What?
You like her better?

Plenty there for both of us.

I was here first.

( moaning )

( horn blows )

I'm sorry.
I'm sorry.

Terrible timing.

( crying )

But I was getting jealous.

Well?

Should we see this cock everyone's always going on about?

( groans )

Everyone knows you love girls.

I bet you always thought they loved you back.

Your famous cock must be very precious to you.

Would you say it's your most precious part?

- ( whistles )
- Please.

( sobbing )
No.

No!
Mercy, please!

Please, mercy!
Mercy!

This is mercy.

I'm not killing you.

Just making a few alterations.

No! No! No!

Please, no! No!

No! No, please!
Please!

You're gonna scare it off.

I'm not gonna scare it.
I'm gonna kill it.

It's too far away.

Is that a palace?

It's a windmill.

Windmill.

Who built it?
Some king?

Just the men who used to live here.

Ygritte: They must have been great builders, stacking stones so high.

Winterfell has towers three times that size.

( mocking ) "I'm Jon Snow and I'm from Winterfell.

My daddy was a fancy lord and I lived in a tower that touched the clouds."

If you're impressed by a windmill, you'd be swooning if you saw the Great Keep at Winterfell.

What's swooning?

Fainting.

What's fainting?

When a girl sees blood and collapses.

Why would a girl see blood and collapse?

Well... not all girls are like you.

Well, girls see more blood than boys.

Or do you like girls who swoon, Jon Snow?

( gasps ) Oh, a spider!

Save me, Jon Snow.

My dress is made of the purest silk from Tralalalaleeday.

I'd like to see you in a silk dress.

Would you?

So I could tear it off you.

Well, you rip my pretty silk dress,

I'll blacken your eye.

Maybe one day I'll take you to Winterfell.

Or maybe one day I'll take you there.

After we've taken our land back.

Ygritte.

You won't win.

I know your people are brave, no one denies that.

- You know nothing--
- Six times in the last thousand years,

a King-beyond-the-Wall has attacked the kingdoms.

- Six times they failed.
- And how do you know that?

Every boy in the North knows it.

We grow up learning it.

Where the battles were fought,

the names of the heroes, who died where.

Six times you've invaded and six times you've failed.

The seventh will be the same.

- Mance is different.
- You don't have the discipline.

You don't have the training.
Your army is no army.

You don't know how to fight together.

- You don't know that.
- I do.

I know it.

If you attack the Wall, you'll die.

All of you.

All of us.

You're mine as I'm yours. And if we die, we die. But first we'll live.

Yes, first we'll live.

( Jojen speaking quietly )

What's he going on about?

And how come he always gets to sit and chat while we do all the work?

Hodor.

00:46:15,058 --] 00:46:18,628
- That's where we are.
- What are you telling him?
- It's all right, Osha.
- It's not all right.

You think I can't hear you every day?

Filling his head with black magic.

Talking about visions and three-eyed ravens and worse.

- Leave him alone.
- He can speak for himself.

I don't fill his head with anything.

Osha: So what do you talk about?

What's happening to him and what that means.

Go on, then.
Tell us what it means.

It's not like that.

I wish I could tell him all the answers. It would be much easier.

I don't want you talking to him anymore.

Until we get to your brother at Castle Black.

- We're not going to Castle Black.
- What did you say?

I told you already. Jon Snow isn't there.

Bran needs to find the raven beyond the Wall.

Oh, no. I'm not going back there.

Your brother is at Castle Black. That's where we're going.

Look at me.

The raven's been coming to me ever since I fell from that tower.

He wants me to find him.

I don't have my legs anymore.

This is what I have now.

You have a family.

You need to go back to Castle Black so you can get back to them where you belong.

What if I belong in the North?

What if I fell from that tower for a reason?

Is that what he's telling you?

That it's all for a reason?

All these bad things happened because the gods got big plans for you?

I wish it were true, little lord.

But the gods wouldn't spare a raven's cold shit for you or me or anyone.

You don't understand.
You don't know.

You don't know.
None of you know.

None of you have been up there.

I had a man once.

A good man.

Bruni, his name was.

I was his and he was mine.

But one night Bruni disappears.

People said he left me, but I knew him.

He'd never leave me.
Not for long.

I knew he'd come back.

And he did.

He came in through the back of the hut.

Only it wasn't Bruni.

Not really.

His skin was pale

like a dead man's.

His eyes bluer than clear sky.

He came at me, grabbed me by the neck and squeezed so hard I could feel the life slipping out of me.

I don't know how I got the knife.

When I did, I stuck it deep into his heart.

And he hardly seemed to notice.

I had to burn our hut down with him inside.

I didn't ask the gods what it meant.

I didn't need to.
I already knew.

It meant the North was no place for men to be.

Not anymore.

I promised your maester I'd get you to Castle Black and no further.

Qyburn: How is the pain, my lord?

What's the purpose of an arm with no hand?

Well, we've stymied the corruption.

Yes, we've stymied the corruption.

You're a learned man.

All the good it's done me.

You did well sewing up this mess.

You're far better at this sort of work than Grand Maester Pycelle.

Faint praise, my lord.

So why did the Citadel take your chain?

Did you fondle one boy too many?

No, my lord. That's not my weakness.

What is?

Curiosity.

The only way to treat disease is to understand disease.

And the only way to understand it is to study the afflicted.

You performed experiments on living men.

- On dying men.
- With their permission?

My studies have given me insight that has saved many lives.

Dying paupers, I assume.

Men with no families to complain.

You found them moaning in the poorhouse and had them carted back to your garret and opened up their bellies
to see what was inside.

How many men have you killed, my lord?

I don't know.

50? 100?

Countless.

Countless has a nice ring to it.

And how many lives have you saved?

Half a million.

The population of King's Landing.

You were in charge of the ravens at Harrenhal.

Did you-- did you get a bird off to Brienne's father in Tarth?

A bird flew off and a bird flew back.

Lord Selwyn Tarth offered 300 gold dragons for his daughter's safe return.

- A fair offer.
- A fair offer. Locke won't take it.

Why not?

He's convinced Lord Tarth owns all the sapphire mines in Westeros.

( sighs )

He feels he's being cheated.

They'd be fools to kill her.

These men have been at war a long time.

Most of them will be dead by winter.

She'll be their entertainment tonight.

Beyond tonight, I don't think they care very much.

We have to return to Harrenhal.

Why?

I've left something behind.

Absolutely not.

I've got orders from Lord Bolton.

And what are those orders?

To deliver you to your father at King's Landing.

You think you'll get a reward.

I serve Lord Bolton.

Any appreciation your father-- You think you're getting a reward.

Let me explain something to you.

When my father sees me, the first thing he's going to ask is what happened to my hand.

And I'm going to tell him this man chopped it off.

- I had nothing--
- Or I could tell him this man saved my life.

We return to Harrenhal now.

( birds cawing )

Whoa.

- Eyes open, lads.
- Be quiet.

( distant men singing )

Men: ♪ The bear, the bear and the maiden fair ♪
♪ From there to here, from here to there ♪
♪ All black and brown and covered in hair ♪
♪ He smelled that girl in the summer air ♪
♪ The bear, the bear, and the maiden fair! ♪

( cheering )

Man:
Don't spare her.

Don't spare her!

( roaring )

Well, this is one shameful fucking performance.

Stop running and fight.

( bear growling )

A wooden sword?

- I thought you'd gone.
- You gave her a wooden sword.

We've only got one bear.

I'll pay her bloody ransom.

Gold, sapphires, whatever you want.

Just get her out of there.

All you lords and ladies still think that the only thing that matters is gold.

This makes me happier than all your gold ever could.

And that makes me happier than all her sapphires.

So go buy yourself a golden hand and fuck yourself with it.

( roaring )

Ah!

- Get behind me.
- I will not.

( groans )

( growls )

What the fuck are you doing to my bear?

Lord Bolton charged me with bringing him back to King's Landing alive and that's what I aim to do.

Pull her up.

Hold my legs.

( roaring )

Pull him up!

( men booing )

The bitch stays.

We're taking her to King's Landing.

Unless you kill me.

She belongs to me.

Lord Bolton's orders.

What do you think is more important to Lord Bolton?

Getting his pet rat a reward or ensuring Tywin Lannister gets his son back alive?

( bear roaring )

Well, we must be on our way.

Sorry about the sapphires.

( bear roaring )


Synopsis

    Main article: The Fellowship of the Ring 

Middle-earthMiddle-earth during the Third Age
GimliAdded by Gimli

The Lord of the Rings takes up the story about 60 years after the end of The Hobbit. The story begins in the first volume, The Fellowship of the Ring, when Frodo Baggins, Bilbo's adoptive heir, came into possession of Bilbo's magic ring. Bilbo's old friend, Gandalf the Grey, who got Bilbo involved in the adventures in The Hobbit that led to the discovery of the Ring, discovered that it was in fact the One Ring, the instrument of Sauron's power and the object for which the Dark Lord has been searching for most of the Third Age, and which corrupted others with desire for it and the power it held.

Sauron sent the sinister Ringwraiths, in the guise of riders in black, to the Shire, Frodo's native land, in search of the Ring. Frodo escaped, with the help of his loyal gardener Sam Gamgee and three close friends, Merry Brandybuck, Pippin Took, and Fatty Bolger. While Fatty acted as decoy for the Ringwraiths, Frodo and the others set off to take the Ring to the Elven haven of Rivendell. They were aided by the enigmatic Tom Bombadil, who saved them from Old Man Willow and took them in for a few days of feasting, rest, and counsel. At the town of Bree, Frodo's party was joined by a man called "Strider", who was revealed, in a letter left by Gandalf at the local inn for Frodo, to be Aragorn, the heir to the kingships of Gondor and Arnor, two great realms founded by the Númenórean exiles. Aragorn led the hobbits to Rivendell on Gandalf's request. However, Frodo was gravely wounded by the leader of the Ringwraiths, though he managed to recover under the care of the Half-elven lord Elrond.

In Rivendell, the hobbits also learned that Sauron's forces could only be resisted if Aragorn took up his inheritance and fulfilled an ancient prophecy by wielding the sword Andúril, which had been forged anew from the shards of Narsil, the sword that cut the Ring from Sauron's finger in the Second Age. A high council, attended by representatives of the major races of Middle-earth; Elves, Dwarves, and Men, and presided over by Elrond, decide that the only course of action that can save Middle-earth is to destroy the Ring by taking it to Mordor and casting it into Mount Doom, where it was forged.

Frodo volunteered for the task, and a "Fellowship of the Ring" were formed to aid him — consisting of Frodo, his three Hobbit companions, Gandalf, Aragorn, Boromir of Gondor, Gimli the Dwarf, and Legolas the Elf. Their journey took them through the Mines of Moria, where they were being followed by the wretched creature Gollum, whom Bilbo had met in the Goblin-caves of the Misty Mountains years before. (The full tale of their meeting is told in The Hobbit.) Gollum long possessed the Ring before it passed to Bilbo. Gandalf explained that Gollum belonged to a people "of hobbit-kind" before he came upon the Ring, which corrupted him. A slave to the Ring's evil power, Gollum desperately sought to regain his "Precious." As they proceeded through the Mines, Pippin unintentionally betrayed their presence and the party was attacked by creatures of Sauron. Gandalf battled a giant subterranean demon, the Balrog, and fell into a deep chasm, apparently to his death. Escaping from Moria, the Fellowship, now led by Aragorn, go to the Elven realm of Lothlórien. Here, the Lady Galadriel showed Frodo and Sam visions of the past, present, and future. Frodo also saw the Eye of Sauron, a metaphysical expression of Sauron himself, and Galadriel was tempted by the Ring. By the end of the first volume, after the Fellowship has travelled along the great River Anduin, Frodo decided to continue the trek to Mordor on his own, largely due to the Ring's growing influence on Boromir; however, the faithful Sam insisted on going with him.

In the second volume, The Two Towers, a parallel story, told in the first book of the volume, details the exploits of the remaining members of the Fellowship who aided the country of Rohan in its war against the emerging evil of Saruman, leader of the Order of Wizards, who wanted the Ring for himself. At the start of the first book, the Fellowship was further scattered; Merry and Pippin were captured by Sauron and Saruman's orcs, Boromir was mortally wounded defending them, and Aragorn and the others went off in pursuit of their captors. The three met Gandalf, who has returned to Middle-earth as "Gandalf the White": they found out that he slew the Balrog of Moria, and although the battle also proved fatal to Gandalf, he was then sent back and "reborn" as a more imposing figure. At the end of the first book, Gandalf, Aragorn, Legolas and Gimli helped defeat Saruman's armies at the Battle of the Hornburg while Saruman himself was cornered by the tree-like Ents and Huorns, accompanied by Merry and Pippin, who escaped from captivity, and the two groups' paths crossed.

The second book of the volume tells of Frodo and Sam's exploits on the way to Mount Doom. They managed to capture and "tame" Gollum, who then showed them a way to enter Mordor secretly (as opposed to the Black Gate), albeit through the dreaded realm of Minas Morgul. At the end of the volume, Gollum betrayed Frodo to the great spider, Shelob, and though he survived, he was captured by Orcs. Meanwhile, Sauron launched an all-out military assault upon Middle-earth, with the Witch-king (leader of the Ringwraiths) leading a fell host from Minas Morgul into battle against Gondor, in the War of the Ring.

In the third volume, The Return of the King, the further adventures of Gandalf, Aragorn and company are related in the first book of the volume, while Frodo and Sam's are related in the second, as with The Two Towers. As told in the first book, the Fellowship assisted in the final battles against the armies of Sauron, including the siege of the tower-city of Minas Tirith in Gondor and the climactic life-or-death battle before the Black Gate of Mordor, where the alliance of Gondor and Rohan fought desperately against Sauron's armies in order to distract him from the Ring, hoping to gain time for Frodo to destroy it.

In the second book, Sam rescued Frodo from captivity. After much struggle, they finally reached Mount Doom itself, tailed by Gollum. However, the temptation of the Ring proved too great for Frodo and he claimed it for himself. However, Gollum struggled with him and managed to bite the Ring off. Crazed with triumph, Gollum slipped into the fires of the mountain, and the Ring was destroyed.

Finally, Sauron was defeated, and Aragorn was crowned king. However, all was not over, for Saruman managed to escape and scour the Shire before being overthrown. At the end, Frodo remained wounded in body and spirit and went west accompanied by Bilbo over the Sea to Valinor, where he could find peace.

According to Tolkien's timeline, the events depicted in the story occurred between Bilbo's announcement of his September 22, 3001 birthday party, and Sam's re-arrival to Bag End on October 6, 3021. Most of the events portrayed in the story occur in 3018 and 3019, with Frodo heading out from Bag End on September 23 3018, and the destruction of the Ring six months later on March 25, 3019. 

After Shelob paralyzed Frodo Baggins, an Orc patrol led by Gorbag and Shagrat came across his cocooned body, taking him back to Cirith Ungol where they planned to torture him. While sifting through Frodo's belongings, a dispute began between the two captains after Shagrat claimed ownership of Frodo's Mithril vest, which escalated into a vicious fight all over the fortress between Morgul Orcs and Black Uruks. Gorbag survived much of the fight but was eventually killed by Shagrat.

Tolkien's first ideal name for Gorbag was Yagúl, as told to the History of Middle-Earth: part 4, Sauron Defeated.
Portrayal in adaptationsEdit
The Return of the King filmEdit
Gorbag(Uruk)Gorbag as an Uruk by John Howe
WinterzAdded by Winterz
In the live-action film, Gorbag and Shagrat have a major role reversal. In the book, Shagrat informs Gorbag of the nature of Shelob's venom and how it functions, whereas Gorbag assumes this role in the film and explains it to his fellows upon finding Frodo. Also, Shagrat is the one to claim the vest for himself, while Gorbag insists it be taken to Sauron. After the fight, Shagrat flees to the Black Gate with the mithril shirt while the wounded Gorbag is left for dead in the tower. He was in fact still alive and was about to torture Frodo when Samwise Gamgee impales him from behind. He was portrayed by Stephen Ure, the same actor who played Grishnákh in the previous film. 

The Lord of the Rings was started as a sequel to The Hobbit, a fantasy story that Tolkien had written for, and read to, his children, which was published in 1937.[10] The popularity of The Hobbit led to demands from his publishers for more stories about Hobbits and goblins, and so that same year, at the age of 45, Tolkien began writing the story that would become The Lord of the Rings. The story would not be finished until 12 years later, in 1949, and it would not be fully published until 1955, by which time Tolkien was 63 years old.

Tolkien did not originally intend to write a sequel to The Hobbit, and instead wrote several other children's tales, including Roverandom. As his main work, Tolkien began to outline the history of Arda, telling tales of the Silmarils, and many other stories of how the races and situations that we read about in the Lord of the Rings came to be. Tolkien died before he could complete and put together this work, today known as The Silmarillion, but his son Christopher Tolkien edited his father's work, filled in gaps, and published it in 1977.[11] Some Tolkien biographers regard The Silmarillion as the true "work of his heart",[12] as it provides the historical and linguistic context for the more popular work and for his constructed languages, and occupied the greater part of Tolkien's time. As a result The Lord of the Rings ended up as the last movement of Tolkien's legendarium and in his own as a "much larger, and I hope also in proportion the best, of the entire cycle".[4]

Persuaded by his publishers, he started 'a new Hobbit' in December 1937.[10] After several false starts, the story of the One Ring soon emerged, and the book mutated from being a sequel to The Hobbit, to being, in theme, more a sequel to the unpublished Silmarillion. The idea of the first chapter (A Long-Expected Party) arrived fully-formed, although the reasons behind Bilbo's disappearance, the significance of the Ring, and the title The Lord of the Rings did not arrive until the spring of 1938.[10] Originally, he planned to write another story in which Bilbo had used up all his treasure and was looking for another adventure to gain more; however, he remembered the ring and its powers and decided to write about it instead.[10] He began with Bilbo as the main character but decided that the story was too serious to use the fun-loving hobbit and so Tolkien looked to use a member of Bilbo's family.[10] He thought about using Bilbo's son, but this generated some difficult questions, such as the whereabouts of his wife and whether he would let his son go into danger. Thus he looked for an alternate character to carry the ring. In Greek legend, it was a hero's nephew that gained the item of power, and so the hobbit Frodo came into existence.[10]

Writing was slow due to Tolkien's perfectionism, and was frequently interrupted by his obligations as an examiner, and other academic duties.[citation needed] The first sentence of The Hobbit was in fact written on a blank page which a student had left on an exam paper which Tolkien was marking — "In a hole in the ground there lived a hobbit."[13] He seems to have abandoned The Lord of the Rings during most of 1943 and only restarted it in April 1944.[10] This effort was written as a serial for Christopher Tolkien and C.S. Lewis — the former would be sent copies of chapters as they were written while he was serving in Africa in the Royal Air Force. He made another push in 1946, and showed a copy of the manuscript to his publishers in 1947.[10] The story was effectively finished the next year, but Tolkien did not finish revising earlier parts of the work until 1949.[10]

A dispute with his publishers, Allen & Unwin, led to the book being offered to HarperCollins in 1950. He intended The Silmarillion (itself largely unrevised at this point) to be published along with The Lord of the Rings, but A&U were unwilling to do this. After his contact at Collins, Milton Waldman, expressed the belief that The Lord of the Rings itself "urgently needed cutting", he eventually demanded that they publish the book in 1952. They did not do so, and so Tolkien wrote to Allen and Unwin, saying "I would gladly consider the publication of any part of the stuff."[10]
Publication

For publication, due largely to post-war paper shortages, but also to keep the price of the first volume down, the book was divided into three volumes: The Fellowship of the Ring: Books I and II, The Two Towers: Books III and IV, and The Return of the King: Books V and VI plus 6 appendices. Delays in producing appendices, maps and especially indices led to these being published later than originally hoped — on 21 July 1954, 11 November 1954 and 20 October 1955 respectively in the United Kingdom, slightly later in the United States. The Return of the King was especially delayed. Tolkien, moreover, did not especially like the title The Return of the King, believing it gave away too much of the storyline. He had originally suggested War of the Ring, which was dismissed by his publishers.[14]
LotR book1968Dust jacket of the 1968 UK edition
GimliAdded by Gimli

The books were published under a 'profit-sharing' arrangement, whereby Tolkien would not receive an advance or royalties until the books had broken even, after which he would take a large share of the profits. An index to the entire 3-volume set at the end of third volume was promised in the first volume. However, this proved impractical to compile in a reasonable timescale. Later, in 1966, four indices, not compiled by Tolkien, were added to The Return of the King. Because the three-volume binding was so widely distributed, the work is often referred to as the Lord of the Rings "trilogy." In a letter to W. H. Auden, Tolkien himself made use of the term "trilogy" for the work (The Letters of J. R. R. Tolkien, #163) though he did at other times consider this incorrect, as it was written and conceived as a single book (Letters, #149). It is also often called a novel; however, Tolkien also objected to this term as he viewed it as a romance (Letters, #329; "romance" in this sense refers to a heroic tale).

A 1999 (Millennium Edition) British (ISBN 0-261-10387-3) 7-volume box set followed the six-book division authored by Tolkien, with the Appendices from the end of The Return of the King bound as a separate volume. The letters of Tolkien appeared on the spines of the boxed set which included a CD. To coincide with the film release, a new version of this popular edition was released featuring images from the films, such as: 

    I am Aragorn son of Arathorn, and am called Elessar, the Elfstone, Dúnadain, the heir of Isildur Elendil's son of Gondor. Here is the sword that was broken and is forged again! Will you aid me or thwart me? Choose swiftly!" 
    —Aragorn, in the company of Legolas and Gimli, as they are surrounded by, and speaking to, Éomer and the Riders of Rohan 

Aragorn II, the son of Arathorn II, and Gilraen, also known as Elessar, was the 16th Chieftain of the Dúnedain of the North; he was later crowned King Elessar Telcontar (March 1, 2931 - FO 120 or SR 1541), the 26th King of Arnor, and the 35th King of Gondor and First High King of the Reunited Kingdom. He was a great warrior, and as the heir of Isildur bore the shards of Narsil, reforged and renamed Andúril ("Flame of the West"), in the War of the Ring.
Contents
[show]
Biography
Early years
AragorntoddlerAragorn as a toddler.
Andra2404Added by Andra2404

    "He was Aragorn son of Arathorn, the nine and thirtieth heir in the right line from Isildur, and yet more like Elendil than any before him." 
    —The Silmarillion: Of the Rings of Power and the Third Age 

Aragorn was a descendant of Elros Tar-Minyatur. His ancestor Arvedui was wedded to Fíriel, who bore their son Aranarth, making Aragorn the last descendant of Anárion as well.

When Aragorn was only two years old, his father Arathorn was killed while pursuing orcs. Aragorn was afterwards fostered in Rivendell by Elrond. At the request of his mother, his lineage was kept secret, as she feared he would be killed like his father and grandfather if his true identity as the descendant of Elendil and Heir of Isildur became known. Aragorn was renamed Estel and was not told about his heritage until 2951.

Elrond revealed to "Estel" his true name and ancestry when he was twenty, and gave to him the Ring of Barahir and the Shards of Narsil. Elrond withheld the Sceptre of Annúminas from Aragorn until he "came of the right" to possess the item. It was also around this time that Aragorn met and fell in love with Arwen, Elrond's daughter, newly returned from her mother's homeland of Lórien where she had visited her grandmother Galadriel.

Aragorn thereafter assumed his proper role as the sixteenth Chieftain of the Dúnedain and the Rangers of the North and left the comforts of Rivendell for the wild, where he lived with the remainder of his people, whose kingdom had been destroyed through civil and regional wars centuries before.

Aragorn met Gandalf the Grey in 2956, and they became close friends. Heeding Gandalf's advice, Aragorn and the Rangers began to guard a small land known as the Shire inhabited by the diminutive and agrarian Hobbits, and he became known among the peoples just outside the Shire's borders as Strider.

From TA 2957 to TA 2980, Aragorn undertook great journeys, serving in the armies of King Thengel of Rohan, and Steward Ecthelion II of Gondor. Many of his tasks helped to raise morale in the West and counter the growing threat of Sauron and his allies, and he earned priceless experience which he would later put to use in the War of the Ring. Aragorn served his lords in disguise and his name in Gondor and Rohan during that time was Thorongil (Eagle of the Star). With a small Gondor squadron of ships, he led an assault on the long-standing rebel province of Umbar in 2980, burning many of the Corsairs' ships and personally slaying their lord during the battle on the Havens. After the victory at Umbar, "Thorongil" left the field and, to the dismay of his men, went east.

    Aragorn, Ranger from the North
    called Strider, Dunadan of great worth.
    Heir of Isildur, taking on that guilt.
    Rightful King of Gondor, by Numenoreans built.
    An Elven-maid called Arwen he loved
    And thought of while through Middle-Earth he roved.
    Befriended by Gandalf, great of his Order,
    Travelling the World from Eriador to Mordor.
    After the War he finally took his place
    As King of the dwindling Numenorean race.
    - Arwen Fastred (pseudonym)

Later in 2980, he visited Lórien, and there once again met Arwen. He gave her the heirloom of his House, the Ring of Barahir, and, on the hill of Cerin Amroth, Arwen pledged her hand to him in marriage, renouncing her elvish lineage and accepting the Gift of Men: death.

Elrond withheld from Aragorn permission to marry his daughter until such a time as his foster son should be king of both Gondor and Arnor. As both Elrond and Aragorn knew, to marry a mortal, Arwen would be required to choose mortality, and thus deprive the deathless Elrond of his daughter while the world lasted. Elrond was also concerned for Arwen's own happiness, fearing that in the end she might find death (her own and that of her beloved) too difficult to bear.

Before the events of The Lord of the Rings properly take place, Aragorn also traveled through the Dwarven mines of Moria, to Harad, where (in his own words) "the stars are strange." Tolkien does not specify when these travels occurred nor does he indicate what happens when Aragorn visits.

In 3009, Gandalf grew suspicious of the origin of the ring belonging to the Hobbit Bilbo Baggins, which later turned out to be the One Ring, the source of the Dark Lord Sauron's evil power. Aragorn went at his request into Rhovanion in search of Gollum, who had once possessed the Ring. He caught the creature in the Dead Marshes near Mordor, and brought him as a captive to Thranduil's halls in Mirkwood, where Gandalf questioned him.
War of the Ring
Strider in Prancing Pony - FOTRStrider at The Prancing Pony in Bree.
- DarkchyldeAdded by - Darkchylde

    "If you bring a Ranger with you, it is well to pay attention to him, especially if that Ranger is Aragorn." 
    — Gandalf 

    All that is gold does not glitter,
    Not all those who wander are lost;
    The old that is strong does not wither,
    Deep roots are not reached by the frost.
    From the ashes a fire shall be woken,
    A light from the shadows shall spring;
    Renewed shall be Blade that was Broken,
    The crownless again shall be king.
    — Bilbo's poem about Aragorn

Aragorn joined Frodo Baggins, Bilbo's adopted heir; and three of his friends at the Inn of the Prancing Pony in Bree. Though originally the hobbits were suspicious of Strider, they eventually trusted him and prepared to escape Bree and the Ringwraiths. These four had set out from the Shire to bring the One Ring to Rivendell. Aragorn was aged 87 at that time, nearing the prime of life for one of royal Númenórean descent. With Aragorn's help the Hobbits escaped the pursuing Nazgûl and reached Rivendell. There, Aragorn chose to join Frodo, thus forming the Fellowship of the Ring that was formed to guard Frodo, tasked with destroying the Ring in the fires of Mount Doom in Mordor. Besides Aragorn, Gandalf, and Frodo, the company included Frodo's cousins Pippin and Merry, his best friend Samwise Gamgee, Legolas the elf, Gimli the Dwarf, and Boromir of Gondor.

Before the group set out, the shards of Narsil were reforged, and the restored blade was named Andúril.

Aragorn accompanied the group through an attempt to cross the pass of Caradhras and through the mines of Moria. He helped protect Frodo from an Orc captain (Cave Troll in the movies) and became group leader after Gandalf was presumed lost in battle with a Balrog. Aragorn led the company to Lórien and then down the river Anduin to the Falls of Rauros. Originally he had planned to go to Gondor and aid its people in the war, but after the loss of Gandalf he also was responsible for Frodo.
Death of BoromirAragorn saying goodbye to Boromir after the latter's death.
Adrianus92Added by Adrianus92

Passing through the Argonath and the breaking of the Fellowship, Frodo turned and saw Strider, and yet he was no longer Strider; for the weatherworn Ranger was no longer there. In the stern sat Aragorn, son of Arathorn, proud and erect, guiding the boat with skillful strokes; his hood was cast back, and his dark hair was blowing in the wind, a light was in his eyes: a king returning from exile to his own land.

    "Fear not! he said. "Long have I desired to look upon the likenesses of Isildur and Anarion, my sires of old. Under their shadow Elessar, the Elfstone son of Arathorn of the House of Valandil Isildur's son heir of Elendil, has naught to dread!" 
    — Aragorn proclaiming his lineage 

Legolas talking to Aragorn - FOTRLegolas talks to Aragorn.
- DarkchyldeAdded by - Darkchylde

After passing into the Argonath, the Fellowship camped in Amon Hen. Frodo saw that Boromir had been driven mad by the influence of the One Ring trying to take it. Frodo put the ring on, rendering him invisible, and ran away from Boromir. Frodo climbed to the high seat on Amon Hen; from there he could see Sauron's eye looking for him. The Hobbit felt the eye but it was distracted by Gandalf the White later found in Fangorn Forest by (Aragorn, Legolas, and Gimli looking for Merry and Pippin.) Frodo would struggle against the power of Sauron, finally taking the ring off. Then Frodo knew what had to be done: He was to go alone to Mordor to destroy the ring. On the way back to the river he meets Sam, who goes with him. At this same time, the others were attacked by Saruman's Uruk-hai and a battle ensued. During the ensuing battle, Boromir was killed defending Merry and Pippin and giving up his desire for the ring in a last attempt to resist the ring. After discovering that Frodo had left, Aragorn and the others decided that they would leave Frodo and Sam to continue their quest on their own. Legolas, Gimli, and Aragorn put Boromir's body and war gear in one of the elven boats as a funeral boat and tribute to Boromir for his bravery and courage. His body would be sent to the Falls of Rauros.

While Frodo continued his quest with Samwise Gamgee, Aragorn, Legolas and Gimli went to Rohan to free Merry and Pippin, who had been captured by the Uruk-hai working for Saruman.

    "I am Aragorn son of Arathorn and am called Elessar, the Elfstone, Dúnadan, the heir of Isildur Elendil's son of Gondor. Here is the Sword that was Broken and is forged again! Will you aid me or thwart me? Choose swiftly!" 
    — Aragorn to Éomer and the Riders of Rohan 

Aragorn in Two TowersAragorn while talking to Theoden.
- DarkchyldeAdded by - Darkchylde

In The Two Towers, the Three Hunters (as Aragorn, Legolas, and Gimli were ever after known) encountered Éomer, who had recently been pursuing rumours of an orc raid in the area. From Éomer Aragorn learned that the orcs who had kidnapped Merry and Pippin had been destroyed and that the Hobbits had not been found. Dejected, he led Legolas and Gimli to the site of the battle. Clues led Aragorn to believe that the Hobbits might still be alive, and he led the Three Hunters into Fangorn Forest. They did not find the Hobbits, but they did find Gandalf the White, sent back from Valinor to continue his struggle against Sauron. Gandalf told the Three Hunters that the Hobbits were safe with the Ents of Fangorn. Together, Gandalf and the Three Hunters travelled to Edoras, where Gandalf freed Théoden from Saruman's enchantment and helped him organize the Rohirrim against Saruman. He allied with Théoden and led the refugees to Helm's Deep. It is on this path where we learn that Aragorn is 87 years old.

    Where now are the Dunedain, Elessar, Elessar?
    Where do thy kinsfolk wander afar?
    Near is the hour when the lost should come forth,
    And the Grey Company ride from the North.
    But dark is the path appointed to thee:
    The Dead watch the road that leads to the Sea.
    - Galadriel's message to Aragorn (The Two Towers, Chapter 5)

Aragorn, Legolas and Gimli then help the people of Rohan in the Battle of the Hornburg, in which they conclusively and victoriously defeated Saruman's army. Afterward Aragorn went with Gandalf to Isengard only to find Isengard in ruins by the work of the Ents. (One of Gandalf's plans to bring Saruman to his downfall.), Aragorn being present with Gandalf, Theoden, Éomer, Legolas and Gimli negotiate in a final parley with Saruman. Saruman at first tries to bend Theoden to his will and at first Theoden is almost swayed but then he masters his will and refuses to join with Saruman. Saruman then sneers at Theoden and turns his attention to Gandalf and tries to sway him, only to be laughed at. Then Gandalf offers him a chance of repentance without limits. Saruman turns white in his face at this, sadly in the end however Saruman refuses to repent out of pride and to leave Orthanc. Gandalf breaks Saruman's staff as he is no longer the head and is banished from the Order of Wizards and The White Council. After Saruman crawls away, Grima Wormtongue then throws the Palantír of Orthanc at Gandalf as he and the others are leaving the Orthanc tower. But misses not being able to decide who he hated more Gandalf or Saruman. Thus ending the Battle of the Hornburg and the Battle of Isengard. In order to distract Sauron's attention from Frodo, who had gone into Mordor, Aragorn used the Palantír of Orthanc obtained from Saruman and revealed himself as the heir of Isildur to Sauron. Sauron probably believed that the One Ring had come into Aragorn's hands; therefore he made his assault on Minas Tirith prematurely and without adequate preparation.

In order to defend the city, Aragorn travelled the Paths of the Dead, and summoned the Dead Men of Dunharrow who owed allegiance to the King of Gondor. It had been prophesied by Isildur and Malbeth the Seer that the Dead would be summoned once more to pay their debt for betraying Gondor a millennia before. With their aid the Corsairs of Umbar were defeated.
Aragorn-Dead armyAragorn leads the Army of the Dead against the Orcs
Adrianus92Added by Adrianus92

Aragorn, a small force of Rangers, and a large contingent of men and soldiers from the southern regions then sailed up the Anduin to Minas Tirith. When they arrived at the Battle of the Pelennor Fields, Aragorn unfurled a standard that Arwen had made for him which showed both the White Tree of Gondor along with the jeweled crown and seven stars of the House of Elendil. With the help of the southern forces the armies of Gondor and Rohan rallied together and defeated Sauron's army.

The restoration of the line of Elendil to the throne of Gondor is a subplot of The Lord of the Rings; Aragorn's adventures not only aid Frodo in his Quest, but also bring him closer to his own kingship which, though his by right and lineage, has been left open for centuries due to historical, legal, and military circumstances. The people of Gondor have been under the rule of the Stewards of Gondor for centuries, as it was widely doubted t

hat any of the royal line still lived. Shortly after Isildur's departure, Meneldil, son of Anárion, had severed Gondor from Arnor politically, although the formal title of High King remained with the northern line (as Isildur was Elendil's eldest son). This arrangement had been reinforced by the Steward Pelendur in nearly 2,000 years before when he rejected Arvedui's claim to the Throne of Gondor during a Gondorian succession crisis (Eärnil, a member of the House of Anárion, was eventually chosen as King instead). It is worth noting, however, that Arvedui had also based his claim on the fact that he had married a descendant of Anárion: thus, Aragorn was technically a descendant of not only Elendil and Isildur but of Anárion as well.

    "In this hour take the name that was foretold for you, Elessar, the Elfstone of the House of Elendil!" 
    — Galadriel after giving Aragorn the Elessar 

In Return of the King, the Steward Denethor II declared that he would not bow to a descendant of Isildur (years before, he had seen "Thorongil" as a rival to his father's favor). Aragorn healed Faramir, Denethor's last heir, winning him the immediate recognition of Faramir as rightful heir to the throne; his humility and self-sacrifice gained him the hearts of the inhabitants of Gondor's capital city. Aragorn's healing abilities, moreover, were a sign to the people of Gondor of the identity of their true king; as Ioreth said, "The hands of the King are the hands of a healer, and so shall the rightful king be known." The people hailed him as King that same evening.
Arwen-aragornAragorn and his wife Arwen.
Arwen SkywalkerAdded by Arwen Skywalker

Despite his immediate success and popularity, however, and despite his claim to the throne through raising the royal banner, Aragorn decided to lay aside his claim for the time being. He knew that if he aggressively promoted his claim, rival claimants or debates as to his legitimacy were not out of the question, and this could be a fatal distraction for Gondor at a time when the West needed to be united against Sauron. So, to avoid conflict, after he had healed people during the following nights of March 15–16, he left Minas Tirith and symbolically refused to enter it again until he was crowned King on May first.
As Reunited King of Gondor and Arnor

    "Men of Gondor, hear now the Steward of this Realm! Behold! One has come to claim the kingship again at last. Here is Aragorn, son of Arathorn, chieftain of the Dúnedain of Arnor, Captain of the Host of the West, bearer of the Star of the North, wielder of the Sword Reforged, victorious in battle, whose hands bring healing, the Elfstone, Elessar of the line of Valandil, Isildur's son, Elendil's son of Numenor. Shall he be king and enter into the City and dwell there?" And all the host and all the people cried yea with one voice." 
    — Faramir the Steward announces the coronation of King Elessar 

King AragornAragorn, son of Arathorn, King of Gondor.
- DarkchyldeAdded by - Darkchylde

Upon Sauron's defeat, Aragorn was crowned as King Elessar (translated as Elfstone in Tolkien's invented language of Quenya), a name given to him by Galadriel. (In Sindarin, another of Tolkien's languages, this becomes Edhelharn.) He became the twenty-sixth King of Arnor, thirty-fifth King of Gondor and the first High King of the Reunited Kingdom, though it would be several years before his authority was firmly reestablished in Arnor. His line was referred to as the House of Telcontar (Telcontar being Quenya for "Strider"). Aragorn married Arwen shortly afterwards, and ruled the Kingdom of Gondor and Arnor until 120 of the Fourth Age. His reign was marked by great harmony and prosperity within Gondor and Arnor, and by a great renewal of cooperation and communication between Men, Elves, and Dwarves, fostered by his vigorous rebuilding campaign following the war. Aragorn led the forces of the Reunited Kingdom on military campaigns against some Easterlings and Haradrim, re-establishing rule over much territory that Gondor had lost in previous centuries. He died at the age of 210, after 120 years as king. He was succeeded on the throne by his son. Arwen, saddened by the loss of her husband, gave up her mortal life shortly afterwards. Arwen and Aragorn also had at least two unnamed daughters.

Elendil's Oath sung by Aragorn when he is crowned King is as follows:

"Et Eärello Endorenna utúlien. Sinome maruvan ar Hildinyar tenn' Ambar-metta!"
Death and End of Reign

When in the year 120 of the Fourth Age, King Elessar realised his days were at an end, he went to the House of the Kings in the Silent Street. He said farewell to his son Eldarion and his daughters and gave Eldarion his crown and sceptre. Arwen remained at Aragorn's side until he died. Shortly a year after Aragorn died, Arwen soon died of a broken heart. Eldarion began his reign as the Second King of the Reunited Kingdom after his father's and mother's death.[1]

    "Then a great beauty was revealed in him, so that all who after came there looked on him in wonder; for they saw that the grace of his youth, and the valour of his manhood, and the wisdom and majesty of his age were blended together. And long there he lay, an image of the Kings of Men in glory undimmed before the breaking of the world." 
    — Description of Aragorn's death. 

Characteristics

    "Was there ever anyone like him? Except Gandalf, of course. I think they must be related." 
    —Peregrin Took on Aragorn 

Tolkien gives a brief but detailed description of him in The Lord of the Rings: lean, dark, tall, with "a shaggy head of dark hair flecked with grey, and in a pale stern face a pair of keen grey eyes."[2] In The Tale of Aragorn and Arwen in the Appendices, he was said to be often grim and sad, with unexpected moments of levity. Some time after the publications of the books, Tolkien wrote that he was six feet six inches tall.[3]

Aragorn possessed Elven wisdom due to his childhood in Rivendell with Elrond and the foresight of the Dúnedain. He was also a skilled healer, notably with the plant Athelas (also known as Kingsfoil). He was also a mighty warrior and an unmatched commander; after the Battle of the Pelennor Fields, he, Éomer and Imrahil were said to be left unscathed, even though they had been in the thick of the fighting. Due to his position as Isildur's heir, Aragorn has impressive powers for a Man; he forced Sauron to let him use the Palantír of Orthanc freely (although this was in part due to the fact that as the descendant of Elendil, Aragorn was the true owner of the seeing-stones).

Though there is no indication of his ever doubting his role and destiny as the future king of the Reunited Kingdom and one of the leaders of the war against Sauron (as he did in Peter Jackson's film), he was not immune to self-doubt, as he doubted the wisdom of his decisions while leading the Fellowship after the loss of Gandalf in Moria, and blamed himself for many of their subsequent misfortunes.

On one occasion, his pride (or reverence for his heritage) led to complications, as he refused to disarm and leave his sword Andúril (a priceless heirloom of Númenor and one of the weapons which slew Sauron) at the door of Edoras, as Théoden had required, and only did so after Gandalf left his own sword (also of high lineage) behind. Even so, he swore that death would come to anyone else who touched it (whether by his own hand or by some magic, it is left unsaid).
Names and titles

Aragorn was called the Dúnadan ("Man of the West/Númenórean") by the Elves of Rivendell, Longshanks or Stick-at-naught Strider (two of several derogatory titles given by Bill Ferny in Bree), Strider by Butterbur and the people of Bree (it was under this name that he was introduced to Frodo), and Wingfoot (given by Éomer after discovering that Aragorn had travelled forty-five leagues in four days in pursuit of Pippin, Merry, and their Uruk-hai captors). He was the founder of the House of Telcontar (Telcontar is "Strider" in Quenya, after the mistrustful nickname given him by the rustics of the North. This was prompted by Pippin when, as a guard of the citadel, he greeted Aragorn quite familiarly as 'Strider'. Which severely shocked Prince Imrahil, who ruled Gondor well into the Fourth Age of Middle-earth) in records, his full ruling name is given as Elessar Telcontar ("Elfstone Strider"). He was also known as Estel ("hope") to protect his true lineage from the Enemy when they were seeking the heir of Isildur until he came of the age of 20. He was also known as Thorongil ("Eagle of the Star") in his younger days when he travelled around Middle-earth and performed services in Rohan and Gondor often by protecting camps and raiding enemy strongholds like he did when he crossed the Corsairs of Umbar.
Weapons
AndurilAnduril Flame of the West
Darth MantusAdded by Darth Mantus

    Main article: Andúril 

Aragorn's skills in battle lay primarily in his sword craft. He was a mighty warrior with the sword and easily defeated many types of foes, ranging from large groups of orcs to far more powerful foes such as Trolls and Ringwraiths, evident throughout various battles like Helm's Deep and the Morannon. In each case, Aragorn's finesse in battle has served him greatly and earned him much recognition and respect from both the Fellowship of the Ring and the people of Rohan and Gondor. He was arguably the greatest swordsman of the Third Age, surpassing the likes of Faramir, Boromir and perhaps even Elrond.

Aragorn's sword is Andúril, Flame of the West, the reforged sword Narsil, Elendil's blade that Isildur used to cut the One Ring from Sauron's hand. Aragorn uses it with the same skill the Numenoreans had long ago.
Concept and creation
Identity

The "first term" of the character that later evolved into Aragorn or Strider was a peculiar hobbit met by Bingo Bolger-Baggins (precursor of Frodo Baggins) at the inn of The Prancing Pony. His description and behavior, however, was already quite close to the final story, with the difference that the hobbit wore wooden shoes, and was nicknamed Trotter for the "clitter-clap" sound that they produced. He was also accounted to be "one of the wild folk — rangers", and he played the same role in Frodo's journey to Rivendell as in The Lord of the Rings.

Later Tolkien hesitated about the true identity of "Trotter" for a long time. One of his notes suggested that the Rangers should not be hobbits as originally planned, and that this would mean that Trotter was either a Man, or a hobbit who associated himself with the Rangers and was "very well known" (within the story). The latter suggestion was linked to an early comment of Bingo: "I keep on feeling that I have seen him somewhere before". Tolkien made a proposal that Trotter might be Bilbo Baggins himself, but rejected that idea.

Another suggestion was that Trotter was "Fosco Took (Bilbo's first cousin), who vanished when a lad, owing to Gandalf". This story was further elaborated, making Trotter a nephew of Bilbo, named Peregrin Boffin, and an elder cousin of Frodo. He was said to have run away after he came of age, some twenty years before Bilbo's party, and had helped Gandalf in tracking Gollum later. A hint was also given as to why Trotter wore wooden shoes: he had been captured by the Dark Lord in Mordor and tortured, but saved by Gandalf; a note was added by Tolkien in the margin, saying that it would later be revealed that Trotter had wooden feet.

The conception of Trotter being a hobbit was discarded with the following recommencing of writing; another short-lived idea was to make Trotter "a disguised elf − friend of Bilbo's in Rivendell", and a scout from Rivendell who "pretends to be a ranger".

Quite soon Tolkien finally settled on the Mannish identity of Trotter, from the beginning introducing him as a "descendant of the ancient men of the North, and one of Elrond's household", as well as the name Aragorn. While the history of Númenor and the descendants of Elros and Elendil were not fully developed, the terms of it were in existence, and would come to be connected with The Lord of the Rings as the character of Aragorn developed. Thus the evolution of the history of the Second and Third Ages was dependent on the bringing of Trotter to association with them.
Further character developments

The development of Aragorn's connection to Gondor was long and complex, as was his association with Boromir. Initially it is said that Aragorn's forefathers were the exiles of Númenor who ruled over the people of Ond (early name of Gondor), but were driven out by the Wizard King "when Sauron raised a rebellion". The story of the two branches of Elendil's descendants ruling over two kingdoms of Men through many generations only emerged gradually; at one time, Tolkien even seems to have conceived only three generations between Isildur and Aragorn.

One significant feature which was not established until late stages was Aragorn's relationship with Arwen. When Tolkien first introduced Éowyn, the interest which she showed towards Aragorn was not one-sided, with suggestions in notes that they would marry at the end of the story. Another proposal was done soon, that Éowyn would die to save or avenge Théoden, and Aragorn would never marry after her death.

The first mention of Elrond's daughter, named Arwen Undomiel, was in reference to the banner which she made for Aragorn, but Tolkien did not give any hint whether she had any further part to play. The references to her marriage with Aragorn were made later, but it was explicitly stated only near the completion of the book. It is only in his working on the appendices for The Lord of the Rings that Tolkien recorded the full tale of Aragorn and Arwen.

A passing idea was that Galadriel gave her Ring to Aragorn, and that he would accordingly be titled the "Lord of the Ring".
Rejected names

The original nickname Trotter was retained for a long while, and Tolkien decided to change it to Strider only after the story was completed. There were also several experimental translations of Trotter to Sindarin: Padathir, Du-finnion and Rimbedir, with Ethelion possibly being equivalent to Peregrin (Boffin). Instead of the latter title "the Dúnadan", Quenya Tarkil ('noble Man') was first used, synonym with Númenórean.

Tolkien hesitated for some time about Trotter's "real" name. Although Aragorn was the first suggestion when the Mannish descent was settled, it was changed a number of times. At one point Tolkien decided that an Elvish name does not suit a Man, and thus altered it from Aragorn via Elfstone to Ingold, where the last one is an Old English name with ing- representing 'west'. Later, however, a new plot element was introduced: Galadriel's gift of a green stone, and Tolkien reverted the usage to Elfstone in order to make an additional connection. This was retained into the final version of the legendarium as a side name and a translation of Elessar.

Among other names to be used instead of Elfstone Tolkien considered Elfstan, Elfmere, Elf-friend, Elfspear, Elfwold and Erkenbrand, with various Elvish forms: Eldamir, Eldavel, Eledon, and Qendemir. The name of Aragorn's father also passed through many transient forms: Tolkien intended Aramir or Celegorn to go in pair with Aragorn before settling upon Arathorn; Elfhelm and Eldakar with Elfstone and Eldamir; and Ingrim with Ingold.
History and Mythology

Richard J. Finn presented a paper titled, Arthur and Aragorn - Arthurian Influence in LOTR at the Forty-First International Congress on Medieval Studies. The are additional similarities between Aragorn and Arthur beyond those pointed out by Finn. Arthur is descended from Kings of Goddodin - Coel Hen, Aragorn becomes King of Gondor. Kings of the period in Goddodin lived at both Traprain Law and Din Eidyn (Edinburgh, still known as Dùn Éideann in Scottish Gaelic) remarkably similar to Dúnadan. For "Men of the North", Goddodin was a far northern kingdom. Arthur was crowned by St. Dubriticus, who wore a long gray robe for which he was called "His Grey Eminence", Gandalf the White who also wore a gray robe to indicate he at one time was Gandalf the Grey and crowned Aragorn.
Appearance in the books and films
In the books

    The Fellowship of the Ring
    The Two Towers
    The Return of the King 

In the movies

    The Fellowship of the Ring
    The Two Towers
    The Return of the King 

Portrayal in adaptations
Lord of the Rings film trilogy

    "Sons of Gondor, of Rohan! My brothers! I see in your eyes the same fear that would take the heart of me! A day may come when the courage of men fails, when we forsake our friends and break all bonds of fellowship. But it is not this day! An hour of wolves and shattered shields when the Age of Men comes crashing down! But it is not this day! This day we fight! By all that you hold dear on this good earth, I BID YOU STAND, MEN OF THE WEST!!" 
    —Aragorn encouraging the Men of Rohan and Gondor 

In The Lord of the Rings movie trilogy (2001 – 2003) directed by Peter Jackson, Aragorn is played by Danish-American actor Viggo Mortensen, who took over the role from Stuart Townsend after a month of rehearsals. In these movies, Aragorn must overcome his self-doubt to claim the kingship. This specific element of self-doubt is not present in Tolkien's books, where Aragorn intends to claim the throne all along. Daniel Day-Lewis was offered the role, but declined.

In order to ensure safe passage across Mordor for Frodo to fulfill his quest, Aragorn then led the Army of the West out from Minas Tirith to make a diversionary feint on the Black Gate of Mordor itself in the Battle of the Morannon. Gandalf had been given supreme command of the war effort after the Pelennor Fields, and acted as chief spokesman in the parley with the Mouth of Sauron; but Aragorn commanded the Allied troops during the battle and its aftermath.
Ralph Bakshi version

Aragorn was voiced by John Hurt in Ralph Bakshi's 1978 animated film version of The Lord of the Rings. Bakshi's Aragorn, unlike all other portrayals that were to follow to date, has no beard. This actually conforms to a statement appearing in Unfinished Tales that implicitly says that Aragorn was not supposed to have one, due to his Elvish ancestry (Elves did not grow beards). In a note written in 1972 or later, among the last writings of my father's on the subject of Middle-earth, there is a discussion of the Elvish strain in Men, as to its being observable in the beardlessness of those who were so descended (it was a characteristic of all Elves to be beardless. However, Tolkien actually wrote elsewhere that Elves did have beards; in The Lord of the Rings itself Círdan is described as having a beard. Also, some viewers and critics have said that this version of Aragorn looks Native American though not necessarily to the detriment of the film.
Rankin/Bass' Return of the King

Aragorn was voiced by Theodore Bikel in the 1980 Rankin/Bass animated version of The Return of the King, made for television. He first appears at the Battle of the Pelennor Fields, leading the reinforcements from southern Gondor.
Stage

(See the stage article: The Lord of the Rings)

Aragorn was portrayed by Evan Buliung in the three-hour production of The Lord of the Rings, which opened in 2006 in Toronto, Canada.

In the United States, Aragorn was portrayed by Josh Beshears in the Cincinnati, Ohio production of The Return of the King (2003) for Clear Stage Cincinnati. At Chicago's Lifeline Theatre, Aragorn was played by Robert McLean in the 1999 production of The Two Towers.
Radio

Robert Stephens voiced the character in the 1981 BBC Radio serial of The Lord of the Rings.
Voice Dubbing actors
Foreign Language 	Voice dubbing artist
Japanese 	Hōchū Ōtsuka (大塚 芳忠)
Korean (SBS TV Edition) 	An Ji Hwan (안지환)
French (Québec) 	Jacques Lavallée
French (France) 	Bernard Gabay
Spanish (Latin America) 	Sergio Gutiérrez Coto
Spanish (Spain) 	Juan Antonio Bernal
Catalan
German 	Jacques Breuer
Italian 	Pino Insegno
Portuguese (Brazil) (Television/DVD) 	Affonso Amajones
Turkish 	Boğaçhan Sözmen
Czech 	Michal Dlouhý
Slovak 	Pavel Višňovský
Hungarian 	Selmeczi Roland †
Russian 	Aleksei Ryazantesv (Рязанцев, Алексей Анатольевич)
Ukrainin 	Michael Zhonin (Михайло Жонін)
Mandarian Chinese (China / Taiwan) 	Kui Lu (陆揆)
Cantonese Chinese (Hong Kong) 	Luo Ooa (羅偉傑)
Thai 	Uttaporn Teemakorn (อรรถพร ธีมากร) (Kapook, Films 2-3)
Wanchai Paowiboon (วันชัย เผ่าวิบูลย์) (Channel 7)
Persian 	Saeed Mozafari (سعید مظفری)
Non-Canonical weapons

Note: The following is from the movie adaptation.

In the film adaptation, Aragorn never carries the shards of Narsil as he did in the books, and only receives the reforged Andúril before entering the Paths of the Dead. Up until this time, Aragorn uses a different, more basic sword that is never given a name. Attached to the scabbard of this sword is a small utility knife that Aragorn uses in the wild country.
Dagger

Note: The following are from the movie adaptation.

Aragorn also uses a long, curved dagger in battle, though a lot less frequently than his sword. This dagger is used for close combat and as a last resort if the sword is useless in a particular situation, such as when Aragorn is knocked down or assassinating Sauron's servants. He received a curved dagger from Celeborn in the movie, upon leaving Lorien. In The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King (video game), Aragorn uses his dagger as a finishing blow for his Final Judgment and Warrior Bane combos. 
Bow

Aragorn's next weapon in his arsenal is his bow. This bow is rarely used at all. Aragorn only uses it in Moria, shooting Goblins in the beginning of the Fight in Balin's Tomb and while fleeing the Bridge of Khazad-dûm. During these few scenes, Aragorn shows that, though he does not have the expert bow skill and speed that Legolas possesses, he is still an effective shooter when he successfully brings down two goblins through small cracks in the door.

In "The Two Towers" and "Return of the King" video games, Aragorn's missile weapon is his bow and arrows. In each case, Aragorn has 30 arrows.
Army of the Dead/Black Stone

Aragorn's final weapon is the Black Stone. He uses it once in The Return of the King to summon the Oathbreakers and defeat the Corsairs of Umbar. He is not shown using it in the movie adaptation.

In LOTR: Conquest, Aragorn's special, heavy attack is to summon the Army of the Dead.

In The Lord of the Rings: The Battle for Middle-earth II, Aragorn's most powerful ability is to summon the Army of the Dead, which appears as four abnormally large, invincible ghost units, who can kill infantry almost instantly, though they are weak against buildings. The only units capable of doing any sort of damage to the Dead are heroes (and possibly siege engines), which even then get immediately wiped out.
House of Telcontar

House of Fingolfin	
  	 
  	 
	Huor	
  	 
  	 
	Rian	
  	 
  	 
	House of Bëor	
  	 
  	 
	Melian	
  	 
  	 
	Thingol
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
Idril	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	Tuor	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	Beren	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	Lúthien
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	Eärendil	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	Elwing
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
  	 
  	 
	Elros	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	Elrond	
  	 
  	 
	Celebrían
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
  	 
  	 
	Kings of Númenor	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
  	 
  	 
	Lords of Andúnië	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
  	 
  	 
	Elendil	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
  	 
  	 
	Isildur	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
Three Sons	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	Valandil	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	Kings of Arnor	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	Chieftains of
the Dúnedain	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	Aragorn Telcontar	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	Arwen	
  	 
  	 
	Elladan	
  	 
  	 
	Elrohir

  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	Eldarion	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	Daughters
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	
  	 
  	 
	Kings of the
Reunited Kingdom


Gallery
BakshiAragorn
Aragorn in the 1978 animated film based on The Lord of the Rings.
ROTKTVAragorn
Aragorn in the 1980 animated TV special based on The Return of the King.
Aragorn 3
Aragorn (Viggo Mortensen) in Peter Jackson's The Lord of the Rings film trilogy (2001-2003).
STAGE ARAGORN
Aragorn in the 2003 Cincinnati stage production of The Return of the King.
Aragorn-The Hunt for Gollum
Aragorn/Strider (Adrian Webster) in the Fan film The Hunt for Gollum.
Lego Aragorn
LEGO Minifigure of Aragorn

Add a photo to this gallery
Trivia

    Near the end of the first movie (The Fellowship of the Ring), in the scene where Aragorn fights the Uruk-hai Captain Lurtz, Aragorn uses his sword to deflect his Elvish dagger, which Lurtz threw at him after he stabbed him in the leg with it. This was not meant to happen as in the original script the knife was supposed to miss and hit the tree behind Aragorn, though the mask Lurtz's actor was wearing restricted his vision, causing him to miss his mark and throw the knife directly at Aragorn. Luckily he was able to use his sword to deflect the knife just in time. The director decided to keep that scene rather than the originally planned scene, as he did just barely manage to knock the dagger away.
    At one point, Viggo Mortensen is approached by one of the prouducers of The Hobbit film, asking him if he would like to reprise his role as Aragorn. Viggo replies that, "You do know, don’t you, that Aragorn isn’t in The Hobbit? That there is a 60-year gap between the books?"
    Aragorn is also descended from the House of Finwë, since Idril is his ancestor Elros' Grandmother, Turgon is his Grandfather, and Fingolfin is his Great-Grandfather. 


Preceded by:
Arathorn II 	16th Chieftain of the Dúnedain
TA 2933 - TA 3019 	Followed by:
Assumed the Throne
Preceded by:
Isildur 	3rd King of all the Dúnedain
TA 3019 - FO 120 	Followed by:
Eldarion
Preceded by:
Arathorn II 	16th Lord of the Dúnedain
TA 2933 - TA 3019 	Followed by:
None
Preceded by:
Arathorn II 	16th Heir of Isildur
TA 2933 - TA 3019 	Followed by:
None
Preceded by:
N/A 	King of the West
TA 3019 - FO 120 	Followed by:
Eldarion
Preceded by:
Vacant, title last held by Isildur 	3rd High King of Gondor and Arnor
TA 3019 - FO 120 	Followed by:
Eldarion
Preceded by:
Vacant, title last held by Eärnur 	35th King of Gondor
TA 3019 - FO 120 	Followed by:
Eldarion
Preceded by:
Vacant, title last held by Arvedui, King of Arthedain 	26th King of Arnor
TA 3019 - FO 120 	Followed by:
Eldarion
Preceded by:
None 	1st King of the Reunited Kingdom
TA 3019 - FO 120 	Followed by:
Eldarion
Preceded by:
None, House and Title newly created 	Lord of the House of Telcontar
FO 120 - ? 	Followed by:
Eldarion


Chieftains of the Dúnedain

Aranarth | Arahael | Aranuir | Aravir | Aragorn I | Araglas | Arahad I | Aragost | Aravorn | Arahad II | Arassuil | Arathorn I | Argonui | Arador | Arathorn II | Aragorn II (Elessar)


The Fellowship of the Ring
    
Frodo.sting
	
    
Sam
	
    
Merry1
	
    
Pippin
	
    
Gandalf the Grey 1
	
    
King Aragorn
	
    
Legolas The Hobbit
	
    
Gimli at the siege of moria
	
    
Seanbean boromir
Frodo · Sam · Merry · Pippin · Gandalf · Aragorn · Legolas · Gimli · Boromir


Kings of Arnor & Kings of Arthedain
Arnor:  	Elendil | Isildur | Valandil | Eldacar | Arantar | Tarcil | Tarondor | Valandur | Elendur | Eärendur
Restoration Period:  	Aragorn II Elessar | Eldarion
Arthedain:  	Amlaith | Beleg | Mallor | Celepharn | Celebrindor | Malvegil | Argeleb I | Arveleg I | Araphor | Argeleb II | Arvegil | Arveleg II | Araval | Araphant | Arvedui


Kings of Gondor

Elendil | Isildur | Meneldil | Cemendur | Eärendil | Anardil | Ostoher | Rómendacil I | Turambar | Atanatar I | Siriondil | Tarannon Falastur | Eärnil I | Ciryandil | Hyarmendacil I | Atanatar II Alcarin | Narmacil I | Calmacil | Rómendacil II | Valacar | Eldacar | Castamir the Usurper | Eldacar (restored) | Aldamir | Hyarmendacil II | Minardil | Telemnar | Tarondor | Telumehtar Umbardacil | Narmacil II | Calimehtar | Ondoher | Eärnil II | Eärnur | Aragorn II Elessar | Eldarion
The one ring animated Lord of the Rings Wiki Featured articles The one ring animated
People: Faramir · Sauron · Witch-king of Angmar · Gollum · Elrond · Frodo Baggins · Samwise Gamgee · Meriadoc Brandybuck · Peregrin Took · Gandalf · Aragorn II Elessar · Legolas Greenleaf · Gimli · Boromir · Galadriel · Elves · Hobbits
Locations: Gondor · Mordor · Middle-earth · Rohan
Other: Mithril · The Lord of the Rings Strategy Battle Game · The Fellowship of the Ring (novel) · Works inspired by J. R. R. Tolkien · The Lord of the Rings · The Lord of the Rings (1978 film) · Ainulindalë · Tolkien vs. Jackson · Tengwar · Quenya
References






Beowulf (modern English translation)
By Anonymous

Translated By Frances B. Grummere
LO, praise of the prowess of people-kings
of spear-armed Danes, in days long sped,
we have heard, and what honor the athelings won!
Oft Scyld the Scefing from squadroned foes,
from many a tribe, the mead-bench tore,
awing the earls. Since erst he lay
friendless, a foundling, fate repaid him:
for he waxed under welkin, in wealth he throve,
till before him the folk, both far and near,
who house by the whale-path, heard his mandate,
gave him gifts: a good king he!
To him an heir was afterward born,
a son in his halls, whom heaven sent
to favor the folk, feeling their woe
that erst they had lacked an earl for leader
so long a while; the Lord endowed him,
the Wielder of Wonder, with world’s renown.
Famed was this Beowulf: far flew the boast of him,
son of Scyld, in the Scandian lands.
So becomes it a youth to quit him well
with his father’s friends, by fee and gift,
that to aid him, aged, in after days,
come warriors willing, should war draw nigh,
liegemen loyal: by lauded deeds
shall an earl have honor in every clan.
Forth he fared at the fated moment,
sturdy Scyld to the shelter of God.
Then they bore him over to ocean’s billow,
loving clansmen, as late he charged them,
while wielded words the winsome Scyld,
the leader beloved who long had ruled....
In the roadstead rocked a ring-dight vessel,
ice-flecked, outbound, atheling’s barge:
there laid they down their darling lord
on the breast of the boat, the breaker-of-rings,   
by the mast the mighty one. Many a treasure
fetched from far was freighted with him.
No ship have I known so nobly dight
with weapons of war and weeds of battle,
with breastplate and blade: on his bosom lay
a heaped hoard that hence should go
far o’er the flood with him floating away.
No less these loaded the lordly gifts,
thanes’ huge treasure, than those had done
who in former time forth had sent him
sole on the seas, a suckling child.
High o’er his head they hoist the standard,
a gold-wove banner; let billows take him,
gave him to ocean. Grave were their spirits,
mournful their mood. No man is able
to say in sooth, no son of the halls,
no hero ‘neath heaven, — who harbored that freight!
Now Beowulf bode in the burg of the Scyldings,
leader beloved, and long he ruled
in fame with all folk, since his father had gone
away from the world, till awoke an heir,
haughty Healfdene, who held through life,
sage and sturdy, the Scyldings glad.
Then, one after one, there woke to him,
to the chieftain of clansmen, children four:
Heorogar, then Hrothgar, then Halga brave;
and I heard that — was —’s queen,
the Heathoscylfing’s helpmate dear.
To Hrothgar was given such glory of war,
such honor of combat, that all his kin
obeyed him gladly till great grew his band
of youthful comrades. It came in his mind
to bid his henchmen a hall uprear,
a master mead-house, mightier far
than ever was seen by the sons of earth,
and within it, then, to old and young
he would all allot that the Lord had sent him,
save only the land and the lives of his men.
Wide, I heard, was the work commanded,
for many a tribe this mid-earth round,
to fashion the folkstead. It fell, as he ordered,
in rapid achievement that ready it stood there,
of halls the noblest: Heorot   he named it
whose message had might in many a land.
Not reckless of promise, the rings he dealt,
treasure at banquet: there towered the hall,
high, gabled wide, the hot surge waiting
of furious flame.   Nor far was that day
when father and son-in-law stood in feud
for warfare and hatred that woke again.   
With envy and anger an evil spirit
endured the dole in his dark abode,
that he heard each day the din of revel
high in the hall: there harps rang out,
clear song of the singer. He sang who knew
tales of the early time of man,
how the Almighty made the earth,
fairest fields enfolded by water,
set, triumphant, sun and moon
for a light to lighten the land-dwellers,
and braided bright the breast of earth
with limbs and leaves, made life for all
of mortal beings that breathe and move.
So lived the clansmen in cheer and revel
a winsome life, till one began
to fashion evils, that field of hell.
Grendel this monster grim was called,
march-riever mighty, in moorland living,
in fen and fastness; fief of the giants
the hapless wight a while had kept
since the Creator his exile doomed.
On kin of Cain was the killing avenged
by sovran God for slaughtered Abel.
Ill fared his feud, and far was he driven,
for the slaughter’s sake, from sight of men.
Of Cain awoke all that woful breed,
Etins   and elves and evil-spirits,
as well as the giants that warred with God
weary while: but their wage was paid them!
WENT he forth to find at fall of night
that haughty house, and heed wherever
the Ring-Danes, outrevelled, to rest had gone.
Found within it the atheling band
asleep after feasting and fearless of sorrow,
of human hardship. Unhallowed wight,
grim and greedy, he grasped betimes,
wrathful, reckless, from resting-places,
thirty of the thanes, and thence he rushed
fain of his fell spoil, faring homeward,
laden with slaughter, his lair to seek.
Then at the dawning, as day was breaking,
the might of Grendel to men was known;
then after wassail was wail uplifted,
loud moan in the morn. The mighty chief,
atheling excellent, unblithe sat,
labored in woe for the loss of his thanes,
when once had been traced the trail of the fiend,
spirit accurst: too cruel that sorrow,
too long, too loathsome. Not late the respite;
with night returning, anew began
ruthless murder; he recked no whit,
firm in his guilt, of the feud and crime.
They were easy to find who elsewhere sought
in room remote their rest at night,
bed in the bowers,   when that bale was shown,
was seen in sooth, with surest token, —
the hall-thane’s   hate. Such held themselves
far and fast who the fiend outran!
Thus ruled unrighteous and raged his fill
one against all; until empty stood
that lordly building, and long it bode so.
Twelve years’ tide the trouble he bore,
sovran of Scyldings, sorrows in plenty,
boundless cares. There came unhidden
tidings true to the tribes of men,
in sorrowful songs, how ceaselessly Grendel
harassed Hrothgar, what hate he bore him,
what murder and massacre, many a year,
feud unfading, — refused consent
to deal with any of Daneland’s earls,
make pact of peace, or compound for gold:
still less did the wise men ween to get
great fee for the feud from his fiendish hands.
But the evil one ambushed old and young
death-shadow dark, and dogged them still,
lured, or lurked in the livelong night
of misty moorlands: men may say not
where the haunts of these Hell-Runes   be.
Such heaping of horrors the hater of men,
lonely roamer, wrought unceasing,
harassings heavy. O’er Heorot he lorded,
gold-bright hall, in gloomy nights;
and ne’er could the prince   approach his throne,
— ‘twas judgment of God, — or have joy in his hall.
Sore was the sorrow to Scyldings’-friend,
heart-rending misery. Many nobles
sat assembled, and searched out counsel
how it were best for bold-hearted men
against harassing terror to try their hand.
Whiles they vowed in their heathen fanes
altar-offerings, asked with words   
that the slayer-of-souls would succor give them
for the pain of their people. Their practice this,
their heathen hope; ‘twas Hell they thought of
in mood of their mind. Almighty they knew not,
Doomsman of Deeds and dreadful Lord,
nor Heaven’s-Helmet heeded they ever,
Wielder-of-Wonder. — Woe for that man
who in harm and hatred hales his soul
to fiery embraces; — nor favor nor change
awaits he ever. But well for him
that after death-day may draw to his Lord,
and friendship find in the Father’s arms!
THUS seethed unceasing the son of Healfdene
with the woe of these days; not wisest men
assuaged his sorrow; too sore the anguish,
loathly and long, that lay on his folk,
most baneful of burdens and bales of the night.
This heard in his home Hygelac’s thane,
great among Geats, of Grendel’s doings.
He was the mightiest man of valor
in that same day of this our life,
stalwart and stately. A stout wave-walker
he bade make ready. Yon battle-king, said he,
far o’er the swan-road he fain would seek,
the noble monarch who needed men!
The prince’s journey by prudent folk
was little blamed, though they loved him dear;
they whetted the hero, and hailed good omens.
And now the bold one from bands of Geats
comrades chose, the keenest of warriors
e’er he could find; with fourteen men
the sea-wood   he sought, and, sailor proved,
led them on to the land’s confines.
Time had now flown;   afloat was the ship,
boat under bluff. On board they climbed,
warriors ready; waves were churning
sea with sand; the sailors bore
on the breast of the bark their bright array,
their mail and weapons: the men pushed off,
on its willing way, the well-braced craft.
Then moved o’er the waters by might of the wind
that bark like a bird with breast of foam,
till in season due, on the second day,
the curved prow such course had run
that sailors now could see the land,
sea-cliffs shining, steep high hills,
headlands broad. Their haven was found,
their journey ended. Up then quickly
the Weders’   clansmen climbed ashore,
anchored their sea-wood, with armor clashing
and gear of battle: God they thanked
for passing in peace o’er the paths of the sea.
Now saw from the cliff a Scylding clansman,
a warden that watched the water-side,
how they bore o’er the gangway glittering shields,
war-gear in readiness; wonder seized him
to know what manner of men they were.
Straight to the strand his steed he rode,
Hrothgar’s henchman; with hand of might
he shook his spear, and spake in parley.
“Who are ye, then, ye armed men,
mailed folk, that yon mighty vessel
have urged thus over the ocean ways,
here o’er the waters? A warden I,
sentinel set o’er the sea-march here,
lest any foe to the folk of Danes
with harrying fleet should harm the land.
No aliens ever at ease thus bore them,
linden-wielders:   yet word-of-leave
clearly ye lack from clansmen here,
my folk’s agreement. — A greater ne’er saw I
of warriors in world than is one of you, —   
yon hero in harness! No henchman he
worthied by weapons, if witness his features,
his peerless presence! I pray you, though, tell
your folk and home, lest hence ye fare
suspect to wander your way as spies
in Danish land. Now, dwellers afar,
ocean-travellers, take from me
simple advice: the sooner the better
I hear of the country whence ye came.”
To him the stateliest spake in answer;
the warriors’ leader his word-hoard unlocked:—
“We are by kin of the clan of Geats,
and Hygelac’s own hearth-fellows we.
To folk afar was my father known,
noble atheling, Ecgtheow named.
Full of winters, he fared away
aged from earth; he is honored still
through width of the world by wise men all.
To thy lord and liege in loyal mood
we hasten hither, to Healfdene’s son,
people-protector: be pleased to advise us!
To that mighty-one come we on mickle errand,
to the lord of the Danes; nor deem I right
that aught be hidden. We hear — thou knowest
if sooth it is — the saying of men,
that amid the Scyldings a scathing monster,
dark ill-doer, in dusky nights
shows terrific his rage unmatched,
hatred and murder. To Hrothgar I
in greatness of soul would succor bring,
so the Wise-and-Brave   may worst his foes, —
if ever the end of ills is fated,
of cruel contest, if cure shall follow,
and the boiling care-waves cooler grow;
else ever afterward anguish-days
he shall suffer in sorrow while stands in place
high on its hill that house unpeered!”
Astride his steed, the strand-ward answered,
clansman unquailing: “The keen-souled thane
must be skilled to sever and sunder duly
words and works, if he well intends.
I gather, this band is graciously bent
to the Scyldings’ master. March, then, bearing
weapons and weeds the way I show you.
I will bid my men your boat meanwhile
to guard for fear lest foemen come, —
your new-tarred ship by shore of ocean
faithfully watching till once again
it waft o’er the waters those well-loved thanes,
— winding-neck’d wood, — to Weders’ bounds,
heroes such as the hest of fate
shall succor and save from the shock of war.”
They bent them to march, — the boat lay still,
fettered by cable and fast at anchor,
broad-bosomed ship. — Then shone the boars   
over the cheek-guard; chased with gold,
keen and gleaming, guard it kept
o’er the man of war, as marched along
heroes in haste, till the hall they saw,
broad of gable and bright with gold:
that was the fairest, ‘mid folk of earth,
of houses ‘neath heaven, where Hrothgar lived,
and the gleam of it lightened o’er lands afar.
The sturdy shieldsman showed that bright
burg-of-the-boldest; bade them go
straightway thither; his steed then turned,
hardy hero, and hailed them thus:—
“Tis time that I fare from you. Father Almighty
in grace and mercy guard you well,
safe in your seekings. Seaward I go,
‘gainst hostile warriors hold my watch.”
STONE-BRIGHT the street:   it showed the way
to the crowd of clansmen. Corselets glistened
hand-forged, hard; on their harness bright
the steel ring sang, as they strode along
in mail of battle, and marched to the hall.
There, weary of ocean, the wall along
they set their bucklers, their broad shields, down,
and bowed them to bench: the breastplates clanged,
war-gear of men; their weapons stacked,
spears of the seafarers stood together,
gray-tipped ash: that iron band
was worthily weaponed! — A warrior proud
asked of the heroes their home and kin.
“Whence, now, bear ye burnished shields,
harness gray and helmets grim,
spears in multitude? Messenger, I,
Hrothgar’s herald! Heroes so many
ne’er met I as strangers of mood so strong.
‘Tis plain that for prowess, not plunged into exile,
for high-hearted valor, Hrothgar ye seek!”
Him the sturdy-in-war bespake with words,
proud earl of the Weders answer made,
hardy ‘neath helmet:—”Hygelac’s, we,
fellows at board; I am Beowulf named.
I am seeking to say to the son of Healfdene
this mission of mine, to thy master-lord,
the doughty prince, if he deign at all
grace that we greet him, the good one, now.”
Wulfgar spake, the Wendles’ chieftain,
whose might of mind to many was known,
his courage and counsel: “The king of Danes,
the Scyldings’ friend, I fain will tell,
the Breaker-of-Rings, as the boon thou askest,
the famed prince, of thy faring hither,
and, swiftly after, such answer bring
as the doughty monarch may deign to give.”
Hied then in haste to where Hrothgar sat
white-haired and old, his earls about him,
till the stout thane stood at the shoulder there
of the Danish king: good courtier he!
Wulfgar spake to his winsome lord:—
“Hither have fared to thee far-come men
o’er the paths of ocean, people of Geatland;
and the stateliest there by his sturdy band
is Beowulf named. This boon they seek,
that they, my master, may with thee
have speech at will: nor spurn their prayer
to give them hearing, gracious Hrothgar!
In weeds of the warrior worthy they,
methinks, of our liking; their leader most surely,
a hero that hither his henchmen has led.”
HROTHGAR answered, helmet of Scyldings:—
“I knew him of yore in his youthful days;
his aged father was Ecgtheow named,
to whom, at home, gave Hrethel the Geat
his only daughter. Their offspring bold
fares hither to seek the steadfast friend.
And seamen, too, have said me this, —
who carried my gifts to the Geatish court,
thither for thanks, — he has thirty men’s
heft of grasp in the gripe of his hand,
the bold-in-battle. Blessed God
out of his mercy this man hath sent
to Danes of the West, as I ween indeed,
against horror of Grendel. I hope to give
the good youth gold for his gallant thought.
Be thou in haste, and bid them hither,
clan of kinsmen, to come before me;
and add this word, — they are welcome guests
to folk of the Danes.” [To the door of the hall
Wulfgar went] and the word declared:—
“To you this message my master sends,
East-Danes’ king, that your kin he knows,
hardy heroes, and hails you all
welcome hither o’er waves of the sea!
Ye may wend your way in war-attire,
and under helmets Hrothgar greet;
but let here the battle-shields bide your parley,
and wooden war-shafts wait its end.”
Uprose the mighty one, ringed with his men,
brave band of thanes: some bode without,
battle-gear guarding, as bade the chief.
Then hied that troop where the herald led them,
under Heorot’s roof: [the hero strode,]
hardy ‘neath helm, till the hearth he neared.
Beowulf spake, — his breastplate gleamed,
war-net woven by wit of the smith:—
“Thou Hrothgar, hail! Hygelac’s I,
kinsman and follower. Fame a plenty
have I gained in youth! These Grendel-deeds
I heard in my home-land heralded clear.
Seafarers say how stands this hall,
of buildings best, for your band of thanes
empty and idle, when evening sun
in the harbor of heaven is hidden away.
So my vassals advised me well, —
brave and wise, the best of men, —
O sovran Hrothgar, to seek thee here,
for my nerve and my might they knew full well.
Themselves had seen me from slaughter come
blood-flecked from foes, where five I bound,
and that wild brood worsted. I’ the waves I slew
nicors   by night, in need and peril
avenging the Weders,   whose woe they sought, —
crushing the grim ones. Grendel now,
monster cruel, be mine to quell
in single battle! So, from thee,
thou sovran of the Shining-Danes,
Scyldings’-bulwark, a boon I seek, —
and, Friend-of-the-folk, refuse it not,
O Warriors’-shield, now I’ve wandered far, —
that I alone with my liegemen here,
this hardy band, may Heorot purge!
More I hear, that the monster dire,
in his wanton mood, of weapons recks not;
hence shall I scorn — so Hygelac stay,
king of my kindred, kind to me! —
brand or buckler to bear in the fight,
gold-colored targe: but with gripe alone
must I front the fiend and fight for life,
foe against foe. Then faith be his
in the doom of the Lord whom death shall take.
Fain, I ween, if the fight he win,
in this hall of gold my Geatish band
will he fearless eat, — as oft before, —
my noblest thanes. Nor need’st thou then
to hide my head;   for his shall I be,
dyed in gore, if death must take me;
and my blood-covered body he’ll bear as prey,
ruthless devour it, the roamer-lonely,
with my life-blood redden his lair in the fen:
no further for me need’st food prepare!
To Hygelac send, if Hild   should take me,
best of war-weeds, warding my breast,
armor excellent, heirloom of Hrethel
and work of Wayland.   Fares Wyrd   as she must.”
HROTHGAR spake, the Scyldings’-helmet:—
“For fight defensive, Friend my Beowulf,
to succor and save, thou hast sought us here.
Thy father’s combat   a feud enkindled
when Heatholaf with hand he slew
among the Wylfings; his Weder kin
for horror of fighting feared to hold him.
Fleeing, he sought our South-Dane folk,
over surge of ocean the Honor-Scyldings,
when first I was ruling the folk of Danes,
wielded, youthful, this widespread realm,
this hoard-hold of heroes. Heorogar was dead,
my elder brother, had breathed his last,
Healfdene’s bairn: he was better than I!
Straightway the feud with fee   I settled,
to the Wylfings sent, o’er watery ridges,
treasures olden: oaths he   swore me.
Sore is my soul to say to any
of the race of man what ruth for me
in Heorot Grendel with hate hath wrought,
what sudden harryings. Hall-folk fail me,
my warriors wane; for Wyrd hath swept them
into Grendel’s grasp. But God is able
this deadly foe from his deeds to turn!
Boasted full oft, as my beer they drank,
earls o’er the ale-cup, armed men,
that they would bide in the beer-hall here,
Grendel’s attack with terror of blades.
Then was this mead-house at morning tide
dyed with gore, when the daylight broke,
all the boards of the benches blood-besprinkled,
gory the hall: I had heroes the less,
doughty dear-ones that death had reft.
— But sit to the banquet, unbind thy words,
hardy hero, as heart shall prompt thee.”
Gathered together, the Geatish men
in the banquet-hall on bench assigned,
sturdy-spirited, sat them down,
hardy-hearted. A henchman attended,
carried the carven cup in hand,
served the clear mead. Oft minstrels sang
blithe in Heorot. Heroes revelled,
no dearth of warriors, Weder and Dane.
UNFERTH spake, the son of Ecglaf,
who sat at the feet of the Scyldings’ lord,
unbound the battle-runes.   — Beowulf’s quest,
sturdy seafarer’s, sorely galled him;
ever he envied that other men
should more achieve in middle-earth
of fame under heaven than he himself. —
“Art thou that Beowulf, Breca’s rival,
who emulous swam on the open sea,
when for pride the pair of you proved the floods,
and wantonly dared in waters deep
to risk your lives? No living man,
or lief or loath, from your labor dire
could you dissuade, from swimming the main.
Ocean-tides with your arms ye covered,
with strenuous hands the sea-streets measured,
swam o’er the waters. Winter’s storm
rolled the rough waves. In realm of sea
a sennight strove ye. In swimming he topped thee,
had more of main! Him at morning-tide
billows bore to the Battling Reamas,
whence he hied to his home so dear
beloved of his liegemen, to land of Brondings,
fastness fair, where his folk he ruled,
town and treasure. In triumph o’er thee
Beanstan’s bairn   his boast achieved.
So ween I for thee a worse adventure
— though in buffet of battle thou brave hast been,
in struggle grim, — if Grendel’s approach
thou darst await through the watch of night!”
Beowulf spake, bairn of Ecgtheow:—
“What a deal hast uttered, dear my Unferth,
drunken with beer, of Breca now,
told of his triumph! Truth I claim it,
that I had more of might in the sea
than any man else, more ocean-endurance.
We twain had talked, in time of youth,
and made our boast, — we were merely boys,
striplings still, — to stake our lives
far at sea: and so we performed it.
Naked swords, as we swam along,
we held in hand, with hope to guard us
against the whales. Not a whit from me
could he float afar o’er the flood of waves,
haste o’er the billows; nor him I abandoned.
Together we twain on the tides abode
five nights full till the flood divided us,
churning waves and chillest weather,
darkling night, and the northern wind
ruthless rushed on us: rough was the surge.
Now the wrath of the sea-fish rose apace;
yet me ‘gainst the monsters my mailed coat,
hard and hand-linked, help afforded, —
battle-sark braided my breast to ward,
garnished with gold. There grasped me firm
and haled me to bottom the hated foe,
with grimmest gripe. ‘Twas granted me, though,
to pierce the monster with point of sword,
with blade of battle: huge beast of the sea
was whelmed by the hurly through hand of mine.
ME thus often the evil monsters
thronging threatened. With thrust of my sword,
the darling, I dealt them due return!
Nowise had they bliss from their booty then
to devour their victim, vengeful creatures,
seated to banquet at bottom of sea;
but at break of day, by my brand sore hurt,
on the edge of ocean up they lay,
put to sleep by the sword. And since, by them
on the fathomless sea-ways sailor-folk
are never molested. — Light from east,
came bright God’s beacon; the billows sank,
so that I saw the sea-cliffs high,
windy walls. For Wyrd oft saveth
earl undoomed if he doughty be!
And so it came that I killed with my sword
nine of the nicors. Of night-fought battles
ne’er heard I a harder ‘neath heaven’s dome,
nor adrift on the deep a more desolate man!
Yet I came unharmed from that hostile clutch,
though spent with swimming. The sea upbore me,
flood of the tide, on Finnish land,
the welling waters. No wise of thee
have I heard men tell such terror of falchions,
bitter battle. Breca ne’er yet,
not one of you pair, in the play of war
such daring deed has done at all
with bloody brand, — I boast not of it! —
though thou wast the bane   of thy brethren dear,
thy closest kin, whence curse of hell
awaits thee, well as thy wit may serve!
For I say in sooth, thou son of Ecglaf,
never had Grendel these grim deeds wrought,
monster dire, on thy master dear,
in Heorot such havoc, if heart of thine
were as battle-bold as thy boast is loud!
But he has found no feud will happen;
from sword-clash dread of your Danish clan
he vaunts him safe, from the Victor-Scyldings.
He forces pledges, favors none
of the land of Danes, but lustily murders,
fights and feasts, nor feud he dreads
from Spear-Dane men. But speedily now
shall I prove him the prowess and pride of the Geats,
shall bid him battle. Blithe to mead
go he that listeth, when light of dawn
this morrow morning o’er men of earth,
ether-robed sun from the south shall beam!”
Joyous then was the Jewel-giver,
hoar-haired, war-brave; help awaited
the Bright-Danes’ prince, from Beowulf hearing,
folk’s good shepherd, such firm resolve.
Then was laughter of liegemen loud resounding
with winsome words. Came Wealhtheow forth,
queen of Hrothgar, heedful of courtesy,
gold-decked, greeting the guests in hall;
and the high-born lady handed the cup
first to the East-Danes’ heir and warden,
bade him be blithe at the beer-carouse,
the land’s beloved one. Lustily took he
banquet and beaker, battle-famed king.
Through the hall then went the Helmings’ Lady,
to younger and older everywhere
carried the cup, till come the moment
when the ring-graced queen, the royal-hearted,
to Beowulf bore the beaker of mead.
She greeted the Geats’ lord, God she thanked,
in wisdom’s words, that her will was granted,
that at last on a hero her hope could lean
for comfort in terrors. The cup he took,
hardy-in-war, from Wealhtheow’s hand,
and answer uttered the eager-for-combat.
Beowulf spake, bairn of Ecgtheow:—
“This was my thought, when my thanes and I
bent to the ocean and entered our boat,
that I would work the will of your people
fully, or fighting fall in death,
in fiend’s gripe fast. I am firm to do
an earl’s brave deed, or end the days
of this life of mine in the mead-hall here.”
Well these words to the woman seemed,
Beowulf’s battle-boast. — Bright with gold
the stately dame by her spouse sat down.
Again, as erst, began in hall
warriors’ wassail and words of power,
the proud-band’s revel, till presently
the son of Healfdene hastened to seek
rest for the night; he knew there waited
fight for the fiend in that festal hall,
when the sheen of the sun they saw no more,
and dusk of night sank darkling nigh,
and shadowy shapes came striding on,
wan under welkin. The warriors rose.
Man to man, he made harangue,
Hrothgar to Beowulf, bade him hail,
let him wield the wine hall: a word he added:—
“Never to any man erst I trusted,
since I could heave up hand and shield,
this noble Dane-Hall, till now to thee.
Have now and hold this house unpeered;
remember thy glory; thy might declare;
watch for the foe! No wish shall fail thee
if thou bidest the battle with bold-won life.”
THEN Hrothgar went with his hero-train,
defence-of-Scyldings, forth from hall;
fain would the war-lord Wealhtheow seek,
couch of his queen. The King-of-Glory
against this Grendel a guard had set,
so heroes heard, a hall-defender,
who warded the monarch and watched for the monster.
In truth, the Geats’ prince gladly trusted
his mettle, his might, the mercy of God!
Cast off then his corselet of iron,
helmet from head; to his henchman gave, —
choicest of weapons, — the well-chased sword,
bidding him guard the gear of battle.
Spake then his Vaunt the valiant man,
Beowulf Geat, ere the bed be sought:—
“Of force in fight no feebler I count me,
in grim war-deeds, than Grendel deems him.
Not with the sword, then, to sleep of death
his life will I give, though it lie in my power.
No skill is his to strike against me,
my shield to hew though he hardy be,
bold in battle; we both, this night,
shall spurn the sword, if he seek me here,
unweaponed, for war. Let wisest God,
sacred Lord, on which side soever
doom decree as he deemeth right.”
Reclined then the chieftain, and cheek-pillows held
the head of the earl, while all about him
seamen hardy on hall-beds sank.
None of them thought that thence their steps
to the folk and fastness that fostered them,
to the land they loved, would lead them back!
Full well they wist that on warriors many
battle-death seized, in the banquet-hall,
of Danish clan. But comfort and help,
war-weal weaving, to Weder folk
the Master gave, that, by might of one,
over their enemy all prevailed,
by single strength. In sooth ‘tis told
that highest God o’er human kind
hath wielded ever! — Thro’ wan night striding,
came the walker-in-shadow. Warriors slept
whose hest was to guard the gabled hall, —
all save one. ‘Twas widely known
that against God’s will the ghostly ravager
him   could not hurl to haunts of darkness;
wakeful, ready, with warrior’s wrath,
bold he bided the battle’s issue.
THEN from the moorland, by misty crags,
with God’s wrath laden, Grendel came.
The monster was minded of mankind now
sundry to seize in the stately house.
Under welkin he walked, till the wine-palace there,
gold-hall of men, he gladly discerned,
flashing with fretwork. Not first time, this,
that he the home of Hrothgar sought, —
yet ne’er in his life-day, late or early,
such hardy heroes, such hall-thanes, found!
To the house the warrior walked apace,
parted from peace;   the portal opended,
though with forged bolts fast, when his fists had struck it,
and baleful he burst in his blatant rage,
the house’s mouth. All hastily, then,
o’er fair-paved floor the fiend trod on,
ireful he strode; there streamed from his eyes
fearful flashes, like flame to see.
He spied in hall the hero-band,
kin and clansmen clustered asleep,
hardy liegemen. Then laughed his heart;
for the monster was minded, ere morn should dawn,
savage, to sever the soul of each,
life from body, since lusty banquet
waited his will! But Wyrd forbade him
to seize any more of men on earth
after that evening. Eagerly watched
Hygelac’s kinsman his cursed foe,
how he would fare in fell attack.
Not that the monster was minded to pause!
Straightway he seized a sleeping warrior
for the first, and tore him fiercely asunder,
the bone-frame bit, drank blood in streams,
swallowed him piecemeal: swiftly thus
the lifeless corse was clear devoured,
e’en feet and hands. Then farther he hied;
for the hardy hero with hand he grasped,
felt for the foe with fiendish claw,
for the hero reclining, — who clutched it boldly,
prompt to answer, propped on his arm.
Soon then saw that shepherd-of-evils
that never he met in this middle-world,
in the ways of earth, another wight
with heavier hand-gripe; at heart he feared,
sorrowed in soul, — none the sooner escaped!
Fain would he flee, his fastness seek,
the den of devils: no doings now
such as oft he had done in days of old!
Then bethought him the hardy Hygelac-thane
of his boast at evening: up he bounded,
grasped firm his foe, whose fingers cracked.
The fiend made off, but the earl close followed.
The monster meant — if he might at all —
to fling himself free, and far away
fly to the fens, — knew his fingers’ power
in the gripe of the grim one. Gruesome march
to Heorot this monster of harm had made!
Din filled the room; the Danes were bereft,
castle-dwellers and clansmen all,
earls, of their ale. Angry were both
those savage hall-guards: the house resounded.
Wonder it was the wine-hall firm
in the strain of their struggle stood, to earth
the fair house fell not; too fast it was
within and without by its iron bands
craftily clamped; though there crashed from sill
many a mead-bench — men have told me —
gay with gold, where the grim foes wrestled.
So well had weened the wisest Scyldings
that not ever at all might any man
that bone-decked, brave house break asunder,
crush by craft, — unless clasp of fire
in smoke engulfed it. — Again uprose
din redoubled. Danes of the North
with fear and frenzy were filled, each one,
who from the wall that wailing heard,
God’s foe sounding his grisly song,
cry of the conquered, clamorous pain
from captive of hell. Too closely held him
he who of men in might was strongest
in that same day of this our life.
NOT in any wise would the earls’-defence   
suffer that slaughterous stranger to live,
useless deeming his days and years
to men on earth. Now many an earl
of Beowulf brandished blade ancestral,
fain the life of their lord to shield,
their praised prince, if power were theirs;
never they knew, — as they neared the foe,
hardy-hearted heroes of war,
aiming their swords on every side
the accursed to kill, — no keenest blade,
no farest of falchions fashioned on earth,
could harm or hurt that hideous fiend!
He was safe, by his spells, from sword of battle,
from edge of iron. Yet his end and parting
on that same day of this our life
woful should be, and his wandering soul
far off flit to the fiends’ domain.
Soon he found, who in former days,
harmful in heart and hated of God,
on many a man such murder wrought,
that the frame of his body failed him now.
For him the keen-souled kinsman of Hygelac
held in hand; hateful alive
was each to other. The outlaw dire
took mortal hurt; a mighty wound
showed on his shoulder, and sinews cracked,
and the bone-frame burst. To Beowulf now
the glory was given, and Grendel thence
death-sick his den in the dark moor sought,
noisome abode: he knew too well
that here was the last of life, an end
of his days on earth. — To all the Danes
by that bloody battle the boon had come.
From ravage had rescued the roving stranger
Hrothgar’s hall; the hardy and wise one
had purged it anew. His night-work pleased him,
his deed and its honor. To Eastern Danes
had the valiant Geat his vaunt made good,
all their sorrow and ills assuaged,
their bale of battle borne so long,
and all the dole they erst endured
pain a-plenty. — ‘Twas proof of this,
when the hardy-in-fight a hand laid down,
arm and shoulder, — all, indeed,
of Grendel’s gripe, — ‘neath the gabled roof’
MANY at morning, as men have told me,
warriors gathered the gift-hall round,
folk-leaders faring from far and near,
o’er wide-stretched ways, the wonder to view,
trace of the traitor. Not troublous seemed
the enemy’s end to any man
who saw by the gait of the graceless foe
how the weary-hearted, away from thence,
baffled in battle and banned, his steps
death-marked dragged to the devils’ mere.
Bloody the billows were boiling there,
turbid the tide of tumbling waves
horribly seething, with sword-blood hot,
by that doomed one dyed, who in den of the moor
laid forlorn his life adown,
his heathen soul,-and hell received it.
Home then rode the hoary clansmen
from that merry journey, and many a youth,
on horses white, the hardy warriors,
back from the mere. Then Beowulf’s glory
eager they echoed, and all averred
that from sea to sea, or south or north,
there was no other in earth’s domain,
under vault of heaven, more valiant found,
of warriors none more worthy to rule!
(On their lord beloved they laid no slight,
gracious Hrothgar: a good king he!)
From time to time, the tried-in-battle
their gray steeds set to gallop amain,
and ran a race when the road seemed fair.
From time to time, a thane of the king,
who had made many vaunts, and was mindful of verses,
stored with sagas and songs of old,
bound word to word in well-knit rime,
welded his lay; this warrior soon
of Beowulf’s quest right cleverly sang,
and artfully added an excellent tale,
in well-ranged words, of the warlike deeds
he had heard in saga of Sigemund.
Strange the story: he said it all, —
the Waelsing’s wanderings wide, his struggles,
which never were told to tribes of men,
the feuds and the frauds, save to Fitela only,
when of these doings he deigned to speak,
uncle to nephew; as ever the twain
stood side by side in stress of war,
and multitude of the monster kind
they had felled with their swords. Of Sigemund grew,
when he passed from life, no little praise;
for the doughty-in-combat a dragon killed
that herded the hoard:   under hoary rock
the atheling dared the deed alone
fearful quest, nor was Fitela there.
Yet so it befell, his falchion pierced
that wondrous worm, — on the wall it struck,
best blade; the dragon died in its blood.
Thus had the dread-one by daring achieved
over the ring-hoard to rule at will,
himself to pleasure; a sea-boat he loaded,
and bore on its bosom the beaming gold,
son of Waels; the worm was consumed.
He had of all heroes the highest renown
among races of men, this refuge-of-warriors,
for deeds of daring that decked his name
since the hand and heart of Heremod
grew slack in battle. He, swiftly banished
to mingle with monsters at mercy of foes,
to death was betrayed; for torrents of sorrow
had lamed him too long; a load of care
to earls and athelings all he proved.
Oft indeed, in earlier days,
for the warrior’s wayfaring wise men mourned,
who had hoped of him help from harm and bale,
and had thought their sovran’s son would thrive,
follow his father, his folk protect,
the hoard and the stronghold, heroes’ land,
home of Scyldings. — But here, thanes said,
the kinsman of Hygelac kinder seemed
to all: the other   was urged to crime!
And afresh to the race,   the fallow roads
by swift steeds measured! The morning sun
was climbing higher. Clansmen hastened
to the high-built hall, those hardy-minded,
the wonder to witness. Warden of treasure,
crowned with glory, the king himself,
with stately band from the bride-bower strode;
and with him the queen and her crowd of maidens
measured the path to the mead-house fair.
HROTHGAR spake, — to the hall he went,
stood by the steps, the steep roof saw,
garnished with gold, and Grendel’s hand:—
“For the sight I see to the Sovran Ruler
be speedy thanks! A throng of sorrows
I have borne from Grendel; but God still works
wonder on wonder, the Warden-of-Glory.
It was but now that I never more
for woes that weighed on me waited help
long as I lived, when, laved in blood,
stood sword-gore-stained this stateliest house, —
widespread woe for wise men all,
who had no hope to hinder ever
foes infernal and fiendish sprites
from havoc in hall. This hero now,
by the Wielder’s might, a work has done
that not all of us erst could ever do
by wile and wisdom. Lo, well can she say
whoso of women this warrior bore
among sons of men, if still she liveth,
that the God of the ages was good to her
in the birth of her bairn. Now, Beowulf, thee,
of heroes best, I shall heartily love
as mine own, my son; preserve thou ever
this kinship new: thou shalt never lack
wealth of the world that I wield as mine!
Full oft for less have I largess showered,
my precious hoard, on a punier man,
less stout in struggle. Thyself hast now
fulfilled such deeds, that thy fame shall endure
through all the ages. As ever he did,
well may the Wielder reward thee still!”
Beowulf spake, bairn of Ecgtheow:—
“This work of war most willingly
we have fought, this fight, and fearlessly dared
force of the foe. Fain, too, were I
hadst thou but seen himself, what time
the fiend in his trappings tottered to fall!
Swiftly, I thought, in strongest gripe
on his bed of death to bind him down,
that he in the hent of this hand of mine
should breathe his last: but he broke away.
Him I might not — the Maker willed not —
hinder from flight, and firm enough hold
the life-destroyer: too sturdy was he,
the ruthless, in running! For rescue, however,
he left behind him his hand in pledge,
arm and shoulder; nor aught of help
could the cursed one thus procure at all.
None the longer liveth he, loathsome fiend,
sunk in his sins, but sorrow holds him
tightly grasped in gripe of anguish,
in baleful bonds, where bide he must,
evil outlaw, such awful doom
as the Mighty Maker shall mete him out.”
More silent seemed the son of Ecglaf   
in boastful speech of his battle-deeds,
since athelings all, through the earl’s great prowess,
beheld that hand, on the high roof gazing,
foeman’s fingers, — the forepart of each
of the sturdy nails to steel was likest, —
heathen’s “hand-spear,” hostile warrior’s
claw uncanny. ‘Twas clear, they said,
that him no blade of the brave could touch,
how keen soever, or cut away
that battle-hand bloody from baneful foe.
THERE was hurry and hest in Heorot now
for hands to bedeck it, and dense was the throng
of men and women the wine-hall to cleanse,
the guest-room to garnish. Gold-gay shone the hangings
that were wove on the wall, and wonders many
to delight each mortal that looks upon them.
Though braced within by iron bands,
that building bright was broken sorely;   
rent were its hinges; the roof alone
held safe and sound, when, seared with crime,
the fiendish foe his flight essayed,
of life despairing. — No light thing that,
the flight for safety, — essay it who will!
Forced of fate, he shall find his way
to the refuge ready for race of man,
for soul-possessors, and sons of earth;
and there his body on bed of death
shall rest after revel. Arrived was the hour
when to hall proceeded Healfdene’s son:
the king himself would sit to banquet.
Ne’er heard I of host in haughtier throng
more graciously gathered round giver-of-rings!
Bowed then to bench those bearers-of-glory,
fain of the feasting. Featly received
many a mead-cup the mighty-in-spirit,
kinsmen who sat in the sumptuous hall,
Hrothgar and Hrothulf. Heorot now
was filled with friends; the folk of Scyldings
ne’er yet had tried the traitor’s deed.
To Beowulf gave the bairn of Healfdene
a gold-wove banner, guerdon of triumph,
broidered battle-flag, breastplate and helmet;
and a splendid sword was seen of many
borne to the brave one. Beowulf took
cup in hall:   for such costly gifts
he suffered no shame in that soldier throng.
For I heard of few heroes, in heartier mood,
with four such gifts, so fashioned with gold,
on the ale-bench honoring others thus!
O’er the roof of the helmet high, a ridge,
wound with wires, kept ward o’er the head,
lest the relict-of-files   should fierce invade,
sharp in the strife, when that shielded hero
should go to grapple against his foes.
Then the earls’-defence   on the floor   bade lead
coursers eight, with carven head-gear,
adown the hall: one horse was decked
with a saddle all shining and set in jewels;
‘twas the battle-seat of the best of kings,
when to play of swords the son of Healfdene
was fain to fare. Ne’er failed his valor
in the crush of combat when corpses fell.
To Beowulf over them both then gave
the refuge-of-Ingwines right and power,
o’er war-steeds and weapons: wished him joy of them.
Manfully thus the mighty prince,
hoard-guard for heroes, that hard fight repaid
with steeds and treasures contemned by none
who is willing to say the sooth aright.
AND the lord of earls, to each that came
with Beowulf over the briny ways,
an heirloom there at the ale-bench gave,
precious gift; and the price   bade pay
in gold for him whom Grendel erst
murdered, — and fain of them more had killed,
had not wisest God their Wyrd averted,
and the man’s   brave mood. The Maker then
ruled human kind, as here and now.
Therefore is insight always best,
and forethought of mind. How much awaits him
of lief and of loath, who long time here,
through days of warfare this world endures!
Then song and music mingled sounds
in the presence of Healfdene’s head-of-armies   
and harping was heard with the hero-lay
as Hrothgar’s singer the hall-joy woke
along the mead-seats, making his song
of that sudden raid on the sons of Finn.   
Healfdene’s hero, Hnaef the Scylding,
was fated to fall in the Frisian slaughter.   
Hildeburh needed not hold in value
her enemies’ honor!   Innocent both
were the loved ones she lost at the linden-play,
bairn and brother, they bowed to fate,
stricken by spears; ‘twas a sorrowful woman!
None doubted why the daughter of Hoc
bewailed her doom when dawning came,
and under the sky she saw them lying,
kinsmen murdered, where most she had kenned
of the sweets of the world! By war were swept, too,
Finn’s own liegemen, and few were left;
in the parleying-place   he could ply no longer
weapon, nor war could he wage on Hengest,
and rescue his remnant by right of arms
from the prince’s thane. A pact he offered:
another dwelling the Danes should have,
hall and high-seat, and half the power
should fall to them in Frisian land;
and at the fee-gifts, Folcwald’s son
day by day the Danes should honor,
the folk of Hengest favor with rings,
even as truly, with treasure and jewels,
with fretted gold, as his Frisian kin
he meant to honor in ale-hall there.
Pact of peace they plighted further
on both sides firmly. Finn to Hengest
with oath, upon honor, openly promised
that woful remnant, with wise-men’s aid,
nobly to govern, so none of the guests
by word or work should warp the treaty,   
or with malice of mind bemoan themselves
as forced to follow their fee-giver’s slayer,
lordless men, as their lot ordained.
Should Frisian, moreover, with foeman’s taunt,
that murderous hatred to mind recall,
then edge of the sword must seal his doom.
Oaths were given, and ancient gold
heaped from hoard. — The hardy Scylding,
battle-thane best,   on his balefire lay.
All on the pyre were plain to see
the gory sark, the gilded swine-crest,
boar of hard iron, and athelings many
slain by the sword: at the slaughter they fell.
It was Hildeburh’s hest, at Hnaef’s own pyre
the bairn of her body on brands to lay,
his bones to burn, on the balefire placed,
at his uncle’s side. In sorrowful dirges
bewept them the woman: great wailing ascended.
Then wound up to welkin the wildest of death-fires,
roared o’er the hillock:   heads all were melted,
gashes burst, and blood gushed out
from bites   of the body. Balefire devoured,
greediest spirit, those spared not by war
out of either folk: their flower was gone.
THEN hastened those heroes their home to see,
friendless, to find the Frisian land,
houses and high burg. Hengest still
through the death-dyed winter dwelt with Finn,
holding pact, yet of home he minded,
though powerless his ring-decked prow to drive
over the waters, now waves rolled fierce
lashed by the winds, or winter locked them
in icy fetters. Then fared another
year to men’s dwellings, as yet they do,
the sunbright skies, that their season ever
duly await. Far off winter was driven;
fair lay earth’s breast; and fain was the rover,
the guest, to depart, though more gladly he pondered
on wreaking his vengeance than roaming the deep,
and how to hasten the hot encounter
where sons of the Frisians were sure to be.
So he escaped not the common doom,
when Hun with “Lafing,” the light-of-battle,
best of blades, his bosom pierced:
its edge was famed with the Frisian earls.
On fierce-heart Finn there fell likewise,
on himself at home, the horrid sword-death;
for Guthlaf and Oslaf of grim attack
had sorrowing told, from sea-ways landed,
mourning their woes.   Finn’s wavering spirit
bode not in breast. The burg was reddened
with blood of foemen, and Finn was slain,
king amid clansmen; the queen was taken.
To their ship the Scylding warriors bore
all the chattels the chieftain owned,
whatever they found in Finn’s domain
of gems and jewels. The gentle wife
o’er paths of the deep to the Danes they bore,
led to her land. The lay was finished,
the gleeman’s song. Then glad rose the revel;
bench-joy brightened. Bearers draw
from their “wonder-vats” wine. Comes Wealhtheow forth,
under gold-crown goes where the good pair sit,
uncle and nephew, true each to the other one,
kindred in amity. Unferth the spokesman
at the Scylding lord’s feet sat: men had faith in his spirit,
his keenness of courage, though kinsmen had found him
unsure at the sword-play. The Scylding queen spoke:
“Quaff of this cup, my king and lord,
breaker of rings, and blithe be thou,
gold-friend of men; to the Geats here speak
such words of mildness as man should use.
Be glad with thy Geats; of those gifts be mindful,
or near or far, which now thou hast.
Men say to me, as son thou wishest
yon hero to hold. Thy Heorot purged,
jewel-hall brightest, enjoy while thou canst,
with many a largess; and leave to thy kin
folk and realm when forth thou goest
to greet thy doom. For gracious I deem
my Hrothulf,   willing to hold and rule
nobly our youths, if thou yield up first,
prince of Scyldings, thy part in the world.
I ween with good he will well requite
offspring of ours, when all he minds
that for him we did in his helpless days
of gift and grace to gain him honor!”
Then she turned to the seat where her sons were placed,
Hrethric and Hrothmund, with heroes’ bairns,
young men together: the Geat, too, sat there,
Beowulf brave, the brothers between.
A CUP she gave him, with kindly greeting
and winsome words. Of wounden gold,
she offered, to honor him, arm-jewels twain,
corselet and rings, and of collars the noblest
that ever I knew the earth around.
Ne’er heard I so mighty, ‘neath heaven’s dome,
a hoard-gem of heroes, since Hama bore
to his bright-built burg the Brisings’ necklace,
jewel and gem casket. — Jealousy fled he,
Eormenric’s hate: chose help eternal.
Hygelac Geat, grandson of Swerting,
on the last of his raids this ring bore with him,
under his banner the booty defending,
the war-spoil warding; but Wyrd o’erwhelmed him
what time, in his daring, dangers he sought,
feud with Frisians. Fairest of gems
he bore with him over the beaker-of-waves,
sovran strong: under shield he died.
Fell the corpse of the king into keeping of Franks,
gear of the breast, and that gorgeous ring;
weaker warriors won the spoil,
after gripe of battle, from Geatland’s lord,
and held the death-field. Din rose in hall.
Wealhtheow spake amid warriors, and said:—
“This jewel enjoy in thy jocund youth,
Beowulf lov’d, these battle-weeds wear,
a royal treasure, and richly thrive!
Preserve thy strength, and these striplings here
counsel in kindness: requital be mine.
Hast done such deeds, that for days to come
thou art famed among folk both far and near,
so wide as washeth the wave of Ocean
his windy walls. Through the ways of life
prosper, O prince! I pray for thee
rich possessions. To son of mine
be helpful in deed and uphold his joys!
Here every earl to the other is true,
mild of mood, to the master loyal!
Thanes are friendly, the throng obedient,
liegemen are revelling: list and obey!”
Went then to her place. — That was proudest of feasts;
flowed wine for the warriors. Wyrd they knew not,
destiny dire, and the doom to be seen
by many an earl when eve should come,
and Hrothgar homeward hasten away,
royal, to rest. The room was guarded
by an army of earls, as erst was done.
They bared the bench-boards; abroad they spread
beds and bolsters. — One beer-carouser
in danger of doom lay down in the hall. —
At their heads they set their shields of war,
bucklers bright; on the bench were there
over each atheling, easy to see,
the high battle-helmet, the haughty spear,
the corselet of rings. ‘Twas their custom so
ever to be for battle prepared,
at home, or harrying, which it were,
even as oft as evil threatened
their sovran king. — They were clansmen good.
THEN sank they to sleep. With sorrow one bought
his rest of the evening, — as ofttime had happened
when Grendel guarded that golden hall,
evil wrought, till his end drew nigh,
slaughter for sins. ‘Twas seen and told
how an avenger survived the fiend,
as was learned afar. The livelong time
after that grim fight, Grendel’s mother,
monster of women, mourned her woe.
She was doomed to dwell in the dreary waters,
cold sea-courses, since Cain cut down
with edge of the sword his only brother,
his father’s offspring: outlawed he fled,
marked with murder, from men’s delights
warded the wilds. — There woke from him
such fate-sent ghosts as Grendel, who,
war-wolf horrid, at Heorot found
a warrior watching and waiting the fray,
with whom the grisly one grappled amain.
But the man remembered his mighty power,
the glorious gift that God had sent him,
in his Maker’s mercy put his trust
for comfort and help: so he conquered the foe,
felled the fiend, who fled abject,
reft of joy, to the realms of death,
mankind’s foe. And his mother now,
gloomy and grim, would go that quest
of sorrow, the death of her son to avenge.
To Heorot came she, where helmeted Danes
slept in the hall. Too soon came back
old ills of the earls, when in she burst,
the mother of Grendel. Less grim, though, that terror,
e’en as terror of woman in war is less,
might of maid, than of men in arms
when, hammer-forged, the falchion hard,
sword gore-stained, through swine of the helm,
crested, with keen blade carves amain.
Then was in hall the hard-edge drawn,
the swords on the settles,   and shields a-many
firm held in hand: nor helmet minded
nor harness of mail, whom that horror seized.
Haste was hers; she would hie afar
and save her life when the liegemen saw her.
Yet a single atheling up she seized
fast and firm, as she fled to the moor.
He was for Hrothgar of heroes the dearest,
of trusty vassals betwixt the seas,
whom she killed on his couch, a clansman famous,
in battle brave. — Nor was Beowulf there;
another house had been held apart,
after giving of gold, for the Geat renowned. —
Uproar filled Heorot; the hand all had viewed,
blood-flecked, she bore with her; bale was returned,
dole in the dwellings: ‘twas dire exchange
where Dane and Geat were doomed to give
the lives of loved ones. Long-tried king,
the hoary hero, at heart was sad
when he knew his noble no more lived,
and dead indeed was his dearest thane.
To his bower was Beowulf brought in haste,
dauntless victor. As daylight broke,
along with his earls the atheling lord,
with his clansmen, came where the king abode
waiting to see if the Wielder-of-All
would turn this tale of trouble and woe.
Strode o’er floor the famed-in-strife,
with his hand-companions, — the hall resounded, —
wishing to greet the wise old king,
Ingwines’ lord; he asked if the night
had passed in peace to the prince’s mind.
HROTHGAR spake, helmet-of-Scyldings:—
“Ask not of pleasure! Pain is renewed
to Danish folk. Dead is Aeschere,
of Yrmenlaf the elder brother,
my sage adviser and stay in council,
shoulder-comrade in stress of fight
when warriors clashed and we warded our heads,
hewed the helm-boars; hero famed
should be every earl as Aeschere was!
But here in Heorot a hand hath slain him
of wandering death-sprite. I wot not whither,   
proud of the prey, her path she took,
fain of her fill. The feud she avenged
that yesternight, unyieldingly,
Grendel in grimmest grasp thou killedst, —
seeing how long these liegemen mine
he ruined and ravaged. Reft of life,
in arms he fell. Now another comes,
keen and cruel, her kin to avenge,
faring far in feud of blood
so that many a thane shall think, who e’er
sorrows in soul for that sharer of rings,
this is hardest of heart-bales. The hand lies low
that once was willing each wish to please.
Land-dwellers here   and liegemen mine,
who house by those parts, I have heard relate
that such a pair they have sometimes seen,
march-stalkers mighty the moorland haunting,
wandering spirits: one of them seemed,
so far as my folk could fairly judge,
of womankind; and one, accursed,
in man’s guise trod the misery-track
of exile, though huger than human bulk.
Grendel in days long gone they named him,
folk of the land; his father they knew not,
nor any brood that was born to him
of treacherous spirits. Untrod is their home;
by wolf-cliffs haunt they and windy headlands,
fenways fearful, where flows the stream
from mountains gliding to gloom of the rocks,
underground flood. Not far is it hence
in measure of miles that the mere expands,
and o’er it the frost-bound forest hanging,
sturdily rooted, shadows the wave.
By night is a wonder weird to see,
fire on the waters. So wise lived none
of the sons of men, to search those depths!
Nay, though the heath-rover, harried by dogs,
the horn-proud hart, this holt should seek,
long distance driven, his dear life first
on the brink he yields ere he brave the plunge
to hide his head: ‘tis no happy place!
Thence the welter of waters washes up
wan to welkin when winds bestir
evil storms, and air grows dusk,
and the heavens weep. Now is help once more
with thee alone! The land thou knowst not,
place of fear, where thou findest out
that sin-flecked being. Seek if thou dare!
I will reward thee, for waging this fight,
with ancient treasure, as erst I did,
with winding gold, if thou winnest back.”
BEOWULF spake, bairn of Ecgtheow:
“Sorrow not, sage! It beseems us better
friends to avenge than fruitlessly mourn them.
Each of us all must his end abide
in the ways of the world; so win who may
glory ere death! When his days are told,
that is the warrior’s worthiest doom.
Rise, O realm-warder! Ride we anon,
and mark the trail of the mother of Grendel.
No harbor shall hide her — heed my promise! —
enfolding of field or forested mountain
or floor of the flood, let her flee where she will!
But thou this day endure in patience,
as I ween thou wilt, thy woes each one.”
Leaped up the graybeard: God he thanked,
mighty Lord, for the man’s brave words.
For Hrothgar soon a horse was saddled
wave-maned steed. The sovran wise
stately rode on; his shield-armed men
followed in force. The footprints led
along the woodland, widely seen,
a path o’er the plain, where she passed, and trod
the murky moor; of men-at-arms
she bore the bravest and best one, dead,
him who with Hrothgar the homestead ruled.
On then went the atheling-born
o’er stone-cliffs steep and strait defiles,
narrow passes and unknown ways,
headlands sheer, and the haunts of the Nicors.
Foremost he   fared, a few at his side
of the wiser men, the ways to scan,
till he found in a flash the forested hill
hanging over the hoary rock,
a woful wood: the waves below
were dyed in blood. The Danish men
had sorrow of soul, and for Scyldings all,
for many a hero, ‘twas hard to bear,
ill for earls, when Aeschere’s head
they found by the flood on the foreland there.
Waves were welling, the warriors saw,
hot with blood; but the horn sang oft
battle-song bold. The band sat down,
and watched on the water worm-like things,
sea-dragons strange that sounded the deep,
and nicors that lay on the ledge of the ness —
such as oft essay at hour of morn
on the road-of-sails their ruthless quest, —
and sea-snakes and monsters. These started away,
swollen and savage that song to hear,
that war-horn’s blast. The warden of Geats,
with bolt from bow, then balked of life,
of wave-work, one monster, amid its heart
went the keen war-shaft; in water it seemed
less doughty in swimming whom death had seized.
Swift on the billows, with boar-spears well
hooked and barbed, it was hard beset,
done to death and dragged on the headland,
wave-roamer wondrous. Warriors viewed
the grisly guest. Then girt him Beowulf
in martial mail, nor mourned for his life.
His breastplate broad and bright of hues,
woven by hand, should the waters try;
well could it ward the warrior’s body
that battle should break on his breast in vain
nor harm his heart by the hand of a foe.
And the helmet white that his head protected
was destined to dare the deeps of the flood,
through wave-whirl win: ‘twas wound with chains,
decked with gold, as in days of yore
the weapon-smith worked it wondrously,
with swine-forms set it, that swords nowise,
brandished in battle, could bite that helm.
Nor was that the meanest of mighty helps
which Hrothgar’s orator offered at need:
“Hrunting” they named the hilted sword,
of old-time heirlooms easily first;
iron was its edge, all etched with poison,
with battle-blood hardened, nor blenched it at fight
in hero’s hand who held it ever,
on paths of peril prepared to go
to folkstead   of foes. Not first time this
it was destined to do a daring task.
For he bore not in mind, the bairn of Ecglaf
sturdy and strong, that speech he had made,
drunk with wine, now this weapon he lent
to a stouter swordsman. Himself, though, durst not
under welter of waters wager his life
as loyal liegeman. So lost he his glory,
honor of earls. With the other not so,
who girded him now for the grim encounter.
BEOWULF spake, bairn of Ecgtheow:—
“Have mind, thou honored offspring of Healfdene
gold-friend of men, now I go on this quest,
sovran wise, what once was said:
if in thy cause it came that I
should lose my life, thou wouldst loyal bide
to me, though fallen, in father’s place!
Be guardian, thou, to this group of my thanes,
my warrior-friends, if War should seize me;
and the goodly gifts thou gavest me,
Hrothgar beloved, to Hygelac send!
Geatland’s king may ken by the gold,
Hrethel’s son see, when he stares at the treasure,
that I got me a friend for goodness famed,
and joyed while I could in my jewel-bestower.
And let Unferth wield this wondrous sword,
earl far-honored, this heirloom precious,
hard of edge: with Hrunting I
seek doom of glory, or Death shall take me.”
After these words the Weder-Geat lord
boldly hastened, biding never
answer at all: the ocean floods
closed o’er the hero. Long while of the day
fled ere he felt the floor of the sea.
Soon found the fiend who the flood-domain
sword-hungry held these hundred winters,
greedy and grim, that some guest from above,
some man, was raiding her monster-realm.
She grasped out for him with grisly claws,
and the warrior seized; yet scathed she not
his body hale; the breastplate hindered,
as she strove to shatter the sark of war,
the linked harness, with loathsome hand.
Then bore this brine-wolf, when bottom she touched,
the lord of rings to the lair she haunted
whiles vainly he strove, though his valor held,
weapon to wield against wondrous monsters
that sore beset him; sea-beasts many
tried with fierce tusks to tear his mail,
and swarmed on the stranger. But soon he marked
he was now in some hall, he knew not which,
where water never could work him harm,
nor through the roof could reach him ever
fangs of the flood. Firelight he saw,
beams of a blaze that brightly shone.
Then the warrior was ware of that wolf-of-the-deep,
mere-wife monstrous. For mighty stroke
he swung his blade, and the blow withheld not.
Then sang on her head that seemly blade
its war-song wild. But the warrior found
the light-of-battle   was loath to bite,
to harm the heart: its hard edge failed
the noble at need, yet had known of old
strife hand to hand, and had helmets cloven,
doomed men’s fighting-gear. First time, this,
for the gleaming blade that its glory fell.
Firm still stood, nor failed in valor,
heedful of high deeds, Hygelac’s kinsman;
flung away fretted sword, featly jewelled,
the angry earl; on earth it lay
steel-edged and stiff. His strength he trusted,
hand-gripe of might. So man shall do
whenever in war he weens to earn him
lasting fame, nor fears for his life!
Seized then by shoulder, shrank not from combat,
the Geatish war-prince Grendel’s mother.
Flung then the fierce one, filled with wrath,
his deadly foe, that she fell to ground.
Swift on her part she paid him back
with grisly grasp, and grappled with him.
Spent with struggle, stumbled the warrior,
fiercest of fighting-men, fell adown.
On the hall-guest she hurled herself, hent her short sword,
broad and brown-edged,   the bairn to avenge,
the sole-born son. — On his shoulder lay
braided breast-mail, barring death,
withstanding entrance of edge or blade.
Life would have ended for Ecgtheow’s son,
under wide earth for that earl of Geats,
had his armor of war not aided him,
battle-net hard, and holy God
wielded the victory, wisest Maker.
The Lord of Heaven allowed his cause;
and easily rose the earl erect.
‘MID the battle-gear saw he a blade triumphant,
old-sword of Eotens, with edge of proof,
warriors’ heirloom, weapon unmatched,
— save only ‘twas more than other men
to bandy-of-battle could bear at all —
as the giants had wrought it, ready and keen.
Seized then its chain-hilt the Scyldings’ chieftain,
bold and battle-grim, brandished the sword,
reckless of life, and so wrathfully smote
that it gripped her neck and grasped her hard,
her bone-rings breaking: the blade pierced through
that fated-one’s flesh: to floor she sank.
Bloody the blade: he was blithe of his deed.
Then blazed forth light. ‘Twas bright within
as when from the sky there shines unclouded
heaven’s candle. The hall he scanned.
By the wall then went he; his weapon raised
high by its hilts the Hygelac-thane,
angry and eager. That edge was not useless
to the warrior now. He wished with speed
Grendel to guerdon for grim raids many,
for the war he waged on Western-Danes
oftener far than an only time,
when of Hrothgar’s hearth-companions
he slew in slumber, in sleep devoured,
fifteen men of the folk of Danes,
and as many others outward bore,
his horrible prey. Well paid for that
the wrathful prince! For now prone he saw
Grendel stretched there, spent with war,
spoiled of life, so scathed had left him
Heorot’s battle. The body sprang far
when after death it endured the blow,
sword-stroke savage, that severed its head.
Soon,   then, saw the sage companions
who waited with Hrothgar, watching the flood,
that the tossing waters turbid grew,
blood-stained the mere. Old men together,
hoary-haired, of the hero spake;
the warrior would not, they weened, again,
proud of conquest, come to seek
their mighty master. To many it seemed
the wolf-of-the-waves had won his life.
The ninth hour came. The noble Scyldings
left the headland; homeward went
the gold-friend of men.   But the guests sat on,
stared at the surges, sick in heart,
and wished, yet weened not, their winsome lord
again to see. Now that sword began,
from blood of the fight, in battle-droppings,   
war-blade, to wane: ‘twas a wondrous thing
that all of it melted as ice is wont
when frosty fetters the Father loosens,
unwinds the wave-bonds, wielding all
seasons and times: the true God he!
Nor took from that dwelling the duke of the Geats
precious things, though a plenty he saw,
save only the head and that hilt withal
blazoned with jewels: the blade had melted,
burned was the bright sword, her blood was so hot,
so poisoned the hell-sprite who perished within there.
Soon he was swimming who safe saw in combat
downfall of demons; up-dove through the flood.
The clashing waters were cleansed now,
waste of waves, where the wandering fiend
her life-days left and this lapsing world.
Swam then to strand the sailors’-refuge,
sturdy-in-spirit, of sea-booty glad,
of burden brave he bore with him.
Went then to greet him, and God they thanked,
the thane-band choice of their chieftain blithe,
that safe and sound they could see him again.
Soon from the hardy one helmet and armor
deftly they doffed: now drowsed the mere,
water ‘neath welkin, with war-blood stained.
Forth they fared by the footpaths thence,
merry at heart the highways measured,
well-known roads. Courageous men
carried the head from the cliff by the sea,
an arduous task for all the band,
the firm in fight, since four were needed
on the shaft-of-slaughter   strenuously
to bear to the gold-hall Grendel’s head.
So presently to the palace there
foemen fearless, fourteen Geats,
marching came. Their master-of-clan
mighty amid them the meadow-ways trod.
Strode then within the sovran thane
fearless in fight, of fame renowned,
hardy hero, Hrothgar to greet.
And next by the hair into hall was borne
Grendel’s head, where the henchmen were drinking,
an awe to clan and queen alike,
a monster of marvel: the men looked on.
BEOWULF spake, bairn of Ecgtheow:—
“Lo, now, this sea-booty, son of Healfdene,
Lord of Scyldings, we’ve lustily brought thee,
sign of glory; thou seest it here.
Not lightly did I with my life escape!
In war under water this work I essayed
with endless effort; and even so
my strength had been lost had the Lord not shielded me.
Not a whit could I with Hrunting do
in work of war, though the weapon is good;
yet a sword the Sovran of Men vouchsafed me
to spy on the wall there, in splendor hanging,
old, gigantic, — how oft He guides
the friendless wight! — and I fought with that brand,
felling in fight, since fate was with me,
the house’s wardens. That war-sword then
all burned, bright blade, when the blood gushed o’er it,
battle-sweat hot; but the hilt I brought back
from my foes. So avenged I their fiendish deeds
death-fall of Danes, as was due and right.
And this is my hest, that in Heorot now
safe thou canst sleep with thy soldier band,
and every thane of all thy folk
both old and young; no evil fear,
Scyldings’ lord, from that side again,
aught ill for thy earls, as erst thou must!”
Then the golden hilt, for that gray-haired leader,
hoary hero, in hand was laid,
giant-wrought, old. So owned and enjoyed it
after downfall of devils, the Danish lord,
wonder-smiths’ work, since the world was rid
of that grim-souled fiend, the foe of God,
murder-marked, and his mother as well.
Now it passed into power of the people’s king,
best of all that the oceans bound
who have scattered their gold o’er Scandia’s isle.
Hrothgar spake — the hilt he viewed,
heirloom old, where was etched the rise
of that far-off fight when the floods o’erwhelmed,
raging waves, the race of giants
(fearful their fate!), a folk estranged
from God Eternal: whence guerdon due
in that waste of waters the Wielder paid them.
So on the guard of shining gold
in runic staves it was rightly said
for whom the serpent-traced sword was wrought,
best of blades, in bygone days,
and the hilt well wound. — The wise-one spake,
son of Healfdene; silent were all:—
“Lo, so may he say who sooth and right
follows ‘mid folk, of far times mindful,
a land-warden old,   that this earl belongs
to the better breed! So, borne aloft,
thy fame must fly, O friend my Beowulf,
far and wide o’er folksteads many. Firmly thou shalt all maintain,
mighty strength with mood of wisdom. Love of mine will I assure thee,
as, awhile ago, I promised; thou shalt prove a stay in future,
in far-off years, to folk of thine,
to the heroes a help. Was not Heremod thus
to offspring of Ecgwela, Honor-Scyldings,
nor grew for their grace, but for grisly slaughter,
for doom of death to the Danishmen.
He slew, wrath-swollen, his shoulder-comrades,
companions at board! So he passed alone,
chieftain haughty, from human cheer.
Though him the Maker with might endowed,
delights of power, and uplifted high
above all men, yet blood-fierce his mind,
his breast-hoard, grew, no bracelets gave he
to Danes as was due; he endured all joyless
strain of struggle and stress of woe,
long feud with his folk. Here find thy lesson!
Of virtue advise thee! This verse I have said for thee,
wise from lapsed winters. Wondrous seems
how to sons of men Almighty God
in the strength of His spirit sendeth wisdom,
estate, high station: He swayeth all things.
Whiles He letteth right lustily fare
the heart of the hero of high-born race, —
in seat ancestral assigns him bliss,
his folk’s sure fortress in fee to hold,
puts in his power great parts of the earth,
empire so ample, that end of it
this wanter-of-wisdom weeneth none.
So he waxes in wealth, nowise can harm him
illness or age; no evil cares
shadow his spirit; no sword-hate threatens
from ever an enemy: all the world
wends at his will, no worse he knoweth,
till all within him obstinate pride
waxes and wakes while the warden slumbers,
the spirit’s sentry; sleep is too fast
which masters his might, and the murderer nears,
stealthily shooting the shafts from his bow!
“UNDER harness his heart then is hit indeed
by sharpest shafts; and no shelter avails
from foul behest of the hellish fiend.   
Him seems too little what long he possessed.
Greedy and grim, no golden rings
he gives for his pride; the promised future
forgets he and spurns, with all God has sent him,
Wonder-Wielder, of wealth and fame.
Yet in the end it ever comes
that the frame of the body fragile yields,
fated falls; and there follows another
who joyously the jewels divides,
the royal riches, nor recks of his forebear.
Ban, then, such baleful thoughts, Beowulf dearest,
best of men, and the better part choose,
profit eternal; and temper thy pride,
warrior famous! The flower of thy might
lasts now a while: but erelong it shall be
that sickness or sword thy strength shall minish,
or fang of fire, or flooding billow,
or bite of blade, or brandished spear,
or odious age; or the eyes’ clear beam
wax dull and darken: Death even thee
in haste shall o’erwhelm, thou hero of war!
So the Ring-Danes these half-years a hundred I ruled,
wielded ‘neath welkin, and warded them bravely
from mighty-ones many o’er middle-earth,
from spear and sword, till it seemed for me
no foe could be found under fold of the sky.
Lo, sudden the shift! To me seated secure
came grief for joy when Grendel began
to harry my home, the hellish foe;
for those ruthless raids, unresting I suffered
heart-sorrow heavy. Heaven be thanked,
Lord Eternal, for life extended
that I on this head all hewn and bloody,
after long evil, with eyes may gaze!
— Go to the bench now! Be glad at banquet,
warrior worthy! A wealth of treasure
at dawn of day, be dealt between us!”
Glad was the Geats’ lord, going betimes
to seek his seat, as the Sage commanded.
Afresh, as before, for the famed-in-battle,
for the band of the hall, was a banquet dight
nobly anew. The Night-Helm darkened
dusk o’er the drinkers. The doughty ones rose:
for the hoary-headed would hasten to rest,
aged Scylding; and eager the Geat,
shield-fighter sturdy, for sleeping yearned.
Him wander-weary, warrior-guest
from far, a hall-thane heralded forth,
who by custom courtly cared for all
needs of a thane as in those old days
warrior-wanderers wont to have.
So slumbered the stout-heart. Stately the hall
rose gabled and gilt where the guest slept on
till a raven black the rapture-of-heaven   
blithe-heart boded. Bright came flying
shine after shadow. The swordsmen hastened,
athelings all were eager homeward
forth to fare; and far from thence
the great-hearted guest would guide his keel.
Bade then the hardy-one Hrunting be brought
to the son of Ecglaf, the sword bade him take,
excellent iron, and uttered his thanks for it,
quoth that he counted it keen in battle,
“war-friend” winsome: with words he slandered not
edge of the blade: ‘twas a big-hearted man!
Now eager for parting and armed at point
warriors waited, while went to his host
that Darling of Danes. The doughty atheling
to high-seat hastened and Hrothgar greeted.
BEOWULF spake, bairn of Ecgtheow:—
“Lo, we seafarers say our will,
far-come men, that we fain would seek
Hygelac now. We here have found
hosts to our heart: thou hast harbored us well.
If ever on earth I am able to win me
more of thy love, O lord of men,
aught anew, than I now have done,
for work of war I am willing still!
If it come to me ever across the seas
that neighbor foemen annoy and fright thee, —
as they that hate thee erewhile have used, —
thousands then of thanes I shall bring,
heroes to help thee. Of Hygelac I know,
ward of his folk, that, though few his years,
the lord of the Geats will give me aid
by word and by work, that well I may serve thee,
wielding the war-wood to win thy triumph
and lending thee might when thou lackest men.
If thy Hrethric should come to court of Geats,
a sovran’s son, he will surely there
find his friends. A far-off land
each man should visit who vaunts him brave.”
Him then answering, Hrothgar spake:—
“These words of thine the wisest God
sent to thy soul! No sager counsel
from so young in years e’er yet have I heard.
Thou art strong of main and in mind art wary,
art wise in words! I ween indeed
if ever it hap that Hrethel’s heir
by spear be seized, by sword-grim battle,
by illness or iron, thine elder and lord,
people’s leader, — and life be thine, —
no seemlier man will the Sea-Geats find
at all to choose for their chief and king,
for hoard-guard of heroes, if hold thou wilt
thy kinsman’s kingdom! Thy keen mind pleases me
the longer the better, Beowulf loved!
Thou hast brought it about that both our peoples,
sons of the Geat and Spear-Dane folk,
shall have mutual peace, and from murderous strife,
such as once they waged, from war refrain.
Long as I rule this realm so wide,
let our hoards be common, let heroes with gold
each other greet o’er the gannet’s-bath,
and the ringed-prow bear o’er rolling waves
tokens of love. I trow my landfolk
towards friend and foe are firmly joined,
and honor they keep in the olden way.”
To him in the hall, then, Healfdene’s son
gave treasures twelve, and the trust-of-earls
bade him fare with the gifts to his folk beloved,
hale to his home, and in haste return.
Then kissed the king of kin renowned,
Scyldings’ chieftain, that choicest thane,
and fell on his neck. Fast flowed the tears
of the hoary-headed. Heavy with winters,
he had chances twain, but he clung to this,   —
that each should look on the other again,
and hear him in hall. Was this hero so dear to him.
his breast’s wild billows he banned in vain;
safe in his soul a secret longing,
locked in his mind, for that loved man
burned in his blood. Then Beowulf strode,
glad of his gold-gifts, the grass-plot o’er,
warrior blithe. The wave-roamer bode
riding at anchor, its owner awaiting.
As they hastened onward, Hrothgar’s gift
they lauded at length. — ‘Twas a lord unpeered,
every way blameless, till age had broken
it spareth no mortal — his splendid might.
CAME now to ocean the ever-courageous
hardy henchmen, their harness bearing,
woven war-sarks. The warden marked,
trusty as ever, the earl’s return.
From the height of the hill no hostile words
reached the guests as he rode to greet them;
but “Welcome!” he called to that Weder clan
as the sheen-mailed spoilers to ship marched on.
Then on the strand, with steeds and treasure
and armor their roomy and ring-dight ship
was heavily laden: high its mast
rose over Hrothgar’s hoarded gems.
A sword to the boat-guard Beowulf gave,
mounted with gold; on the mead-bench since
he was better esteemed, that blade possessing,
heirloom old. — Their ocean-keel boarding,
they drove through the deep, and Daneland left.
A sea-cloth was set, a sail with ropes,
firm to the mast; the flood-timbers moaned;   
nor did wind over billows that wave-swimmer blow
across from her course. The craft sped on,
foam-necked it floated forth o’er the waves,
keel firm-bound over briny currents,
till they got them sight of the Geatish cliffs,
home-known headlands. High the boat,
stirred by winds, on the strand updrove.
Helpful at haven the harbor-guard stood,
who long already for loved companions
by the water had waited and watched afar.
He bound to the beach the broad-bosomed ship
with anchor-bands, lest ocean-billows
that trusty timber should tear away.
Then Beowulf bade them bear the treasure,
gold and jewels; no journey far
was it thence to go to the giver of rings,
Hygelac Hrethling: at home he dwelt
by the sea-wall close, himself and clan.
Haughty that house, a hero the king,
high the hall, and Hygd   right young,
wise and wary, though winters few
in those fortress walls she had found a home,
Haereth’s daughter. Nor humble her ways,
nor grudged she gifts to the Geatish men,
of precious treasure. Not Thryth’s pride showed she,
folk-queen famed, or that fell deceit.
Was none so daring that durst make bold
(save her lord alone) of the liegemen dear
that lady full in the face to look,
but forged fetters he found his lot,
bonds of death! And brief the respite;
soon as they seized him, his sword-doom was spoken,
and the burnished blade a baleful murder
proclaimed and closed. No queenly way
for woman to practise, though peerless she,
that the weaver-of-peace   from warrior dear
by wrath and lying his life should reave!
But Hemming’s kinsman hindered this. —
For over their ale men also told
that of these folk-horrors fewer she wrought,
onslaughts of evil, after she went,
gold-decked bride, to the brave young prince,
atheling haughty, and Offa’s hall
o’er the fallow flood at her father’s bidding
safely sought, where since she prospered,
royal, throned, rich in goods,
fain of the fair life fate had sent her,
and leal in love to the lord of warriors.
He, of all heroes I heard of ever
from sea to sea, of the sons of earth,
most excellent seemed. Hence Offa was praised
for his fighting and feeing by far-off men,
the spear-bold warrior; wisely he ruled
over his empire. Eomer woke to him,
help of heroes, Hemming’s kinsman,
Grandson of Garmund, grim in war.
HASTENED the hardy one, henchmen with him,
sandy strand of the sea to tread
and widespread ways. The world’s great candle,
sun shone from south. They strode along
with sturdy steps to the spot they knew
where the battle-king young, his burg within,
slayer of Ongentheow, shared the rings,
shelter-of-heroes. To Hygelac
Beowulf’s coming was quickly told, —
that there in the court the clansmen’s refuge,
the shield-companion sound and alive,
hale from the hero-play homeward strode.
With haste in the hall, by highest order,
room for the rovers was readily made.
By his sovran he sat, come safe from battle,
kinsman by kinsman. His kindly lord
he first had greeted in gracious form,
with manly words. The mead dispensing,
came through the high hall Haereth’s daughter,
winsome to warriors, wine-cup bore
to the hands of the heroes. Hygelac then
his comrade fairly with question plied
in the lofty hall, sore longing to know
what manner of sojourn the Sea-Geats made.
“What came of thy quest, my kinsman Beowulf,
when thy yearnings suddenly swept thee yonder
battle to seek o’er the briny sea,
combat in Heorot? Hrothgar couldst thou
aid at all, the honored chief,
in his wide-known woes? With waves of care
my sad heart seethed; I sore mistrusted
my loved one’s venture: long I begged thee
by no means to seek that slaughtering monster,
but suffer the South-Danes to settle their feud
themselves with Grendel. Now God be thanked
that safe and sound I can see thee now!”
Beowulf spake, the bairn of Ecgtheow:—
“‘Tis known and unhidden, Hygelac Lord,
to many men, that meeting of ours,
struggle grim between Grendel and me,
which we fought on the field where full too many
sorrows he wrought for the Scylding-Victors,
evils unending. These all I avenged.
No boast can be from breed of Grendel,
any on earth, for that uproar at dawn,
from the longest-lived of the loathsome race
in fleshly fold! — But first I went
Hrothgar to greet in the hall of gifts,
where Healfdene’s kinsman high-renowned,
soon as my purpose was plain to him,
assigned me a seat by his son and heir.
The liegemen were lusty; my life-days never
such merry men over mead in hall
have I heard under heaven! The high-born queen,
people’s peace-bringer, passed through the hall,
cheered the young clansmen, clasps of gold,
ere she sought her seat, to sundry gave.
Oft to the heroes Hrothgar’s daughter,
to earls in turn, the ale-cup tendered, —
she whom I heard these hall-companions
Freawaru name, when fretted gold
she proffered the warriors. Promised is she,
gold-decked maid, to the glad son of Froda.
Sage this seems to the Scylding’s-friend,
kingdom’s-keeper: he counts it wise
the woman to wed so and ward off feud,
store of slaughter. But seldom ever
when men are slain, does the murder-spear sink
but briefest while, though the bride be fair!   
“Nor haply will like it the Heathobard lord,
and as little each of his liegemen all,
when a thane of the Danes, in that doughty throng,
goes with the lady along their hall,
and on him the old-time heirlooms glisten
hard and ring-decked, Heathobard’s treasure,
weapons that once they wielded fair
until they lost at the linden-play   
liegeman leal and their lives as well.
Then, over the ale, on this heirloom gazing,
some ash-wielder old who has all in mind
that spear-death of men,   — he is stern of mood,
heavy at heart, — in the hero young
tests the temper and tries the soul
and war-hate wakens, with words like these:—
Canst thou not, comrade, ken that sword
which to the fray thy father carried
in his final feud, ‘neath the fighting-mask,
dearest of blades, when the Danish slew him
and wielded the war-place on Withergild’s fall,
after havoc of heroes, those hardy Scyldings?
Now, the son of a certain slaughtering Dane,
proud of his treasure, paces this hall,
joys in the killing, and carries the jewel   
that rightfully ought to be owned by thee!
Thus he urges and eggs him all the time
with keenest words, till occasion offers
that Freawaru’s thane, for his father’s deed,
after bite of brand in his blood must slumber,
losing his life; but that liegeman flies
living away, for the land he kens.
And thus be broken on both their sides
oaths of the earls, when Ingeld’s breast
wells with war-hate, and wife-love now
after the care-billows cooler grows.
“So   I hold not high the Heathobards’ faith
due to the Danes, or their during love
and pact of peace. — But I pass from that,
turning to Grendel, O giver-of-treasure,
and saying in full how the fight resulted,
hand-fray of heroes. When heaven’s jewel
had fled o’er far fields, that fierce sprite came,
night-foe savage, to seek us out
where safe and sound we sentried the hall.
To Hondscio then was that harassing deadly,
his fall there was fated. He first was slain,
girded warrior. Grendel on him
turned murderous mouth, on our mighty kinsman,
and all of the brave man’s body devoured.
Yet none the earlier, empty-handed,
would the bloody-toothed murderer, mindful of bale,
outward go from the gold-decked hall:
but me he attacked in his terror of might,
with greedy hand grasped me. A glove hung by him   
wide and wondrous, wound with bands;
and in artful wise it all was wrought,
by devilish craft, of dragon-skins.
Me therein, an innocent man,
the fiendish foe was fain to thrust
with many another. He might not so,
when I all angrily upright stood.
‘Twere long to relate how that land-destroyer
I paid in kind for his cruel deeds;
yet there, my prince, this people of thine
got fame by my fighting. He fled away,
and a little space his life preserved;
but there staid behind him his stronger hand
left in Heorot; heartsick thence
on the floor of the ocean that outcast fell.
Me for this struggle the Scyldings’-friend
paid in plenty with plates of gold,
with many a treasure, when morn had come
and we all at the banquet-board sat down.
Then was song and glee. The gray-haired Scylding,
much tested, told of the times of yore.
Whiles the hero his harp bestirred,
wood-of-delight; now lays he chanted
of sooth and sadness, or said aright
legends of wonder, the wide-hearted king;
or for years of his youth he would yearn at times,
for strength of old struggles, now stricken with age,
hoary hero: his heart surged full
when, wise with winters, he wailed their flight.
Thus in the hall the whole of that day
at ease we feasted, till fell o’er earth
another night. Anon full ready
in greed of vengeance, Grendel’s mother
set forth all doleful. Dead was her son
through war-hate of Weders; now, woman monstrous
with fury fell a foeman she slew,
avenged her offspring. From Aeschere old,
loyal councillor, life was gone;
nor might they e’en, when morning broke,
those Danish people, their death-done comrade
burn with brands, on balefire lay
the man they mourned. Under mountain stream
she had carried the corpse with cruel hands.
For Hrothgar that was the heaviest sorrow
of all that had laden the lord of his folk.
The leader then, by thy life, besought me
(sad was his soul) in the sea-waves’ coil
to play the hero and hazard my being
for glory of prowess: my guerdon he pledged.
I then in the waters — ‘tis widely known —
that sea-floor-guardian savage found.
Hand-to-hand there a while we struggled;
billows welled blood; in the briny hall
her head I hewed with a hardy blade
from Grendel’s mother, — and gained my life,
though not without danger. My doom was not yet.
Then the haven-of-heroes, Healfdene’s son,
gave me in guerdon great gifts of price.
“So held this king to the customs old,
that I wanted for nought in the wage I gained,
the meed of my might; he made me gifts,
Healfdene’s heir, for my own disposal.
Now to thee, my prince, I proffer them all,
gladly give them. Thy grace alone
can find me favor. Few indeed
have I of kinsmen, save, Hygelac, thee!”
Then he bade them bear him the boar-head standard,
the battle-helm high, and breastplate gray,
the splendid sword; then spake in form:—
“Me this war-gear the wise old prince,
Hrothgar, gave, and his hest he added,
that its story be straightway said to thee. —
A while it was held by Heorogar king,
for long time lord of the land of Scyldings;
yet not to his son the sovran left it,
to daring Heoroweard, — dear as he was to him,
his harness of battle. — Well hold thou it all!”
And I heard that soon passed o’er the path of this treasure,
all apple-fallow, four good steeds,
each like the others, arms and horses
he gave to the king. So should kinsmen be,
not weave one another the net of wiles,
or with deep-hid treachery death contrive
for neighbor and comrade. His nephew was ever
by hardy Hygelac held full dear,
and each kept watch o’er the other’s weal.
I heard, too, the necklace to Hygd he presented,
wonder-wrought treasure, which Wealhtheow gave him
sovran’s daughter: three steeds he added,
slender and saddle-gay. Since such gift
the gem gleamed bright on the breast of the queen.

Thus showed his strain the son of Ecgtheow
as a man remarked for mighty deeds
and acts of honor. At ale he slew not
comrade or kin; nor cruel his mood,
though of sons of earth his strength was greatest,
a glorious gift that God had sent
the splendid leader. Long was he spurned,
and worthless by Geatish warriors held;
him at mead the master-of-clans
failed full oft to favor at all.
Slack and shiftless the strong men deemed him,
profitless prince; but payment came,
to the warrior honored, for all his woes. —
Then the bulwark-of-earls   bade bring within,
hardy chieftain, Hrethel’s heirloom
garnished with gold: no Geat e’er knew
in shape of a sword a statelier prize.
The brand he laid in Beowulf’s lap;
and of hides assigned him seven thousand,   
with house and high-seat. They held in common
land alike by their line of birth,
inheritance, home: but higher the king
because of his rule o’er the realm itself.
Now further it fell with the flight of years,
with harryings horrid, that Hygelac perished,   
and Heardred, too, by hewing of swords
under the shield-wall slaughtered lay,
when him at the van of his victor-folk
sought hardy heroes, Heatho-Scilfings,
in arms o’erwhelming Hereric’s nephew.
Then Beowulf came as king this broad
realm to wield; and he ruled it well
fifty winters,   a wise old prince,
warding his land, until One began
in the dark of night, a Dragon, to rage.
In the grave on the hill a hoard it guarded,
in the stone-barrow steep. A strait path reached it,
unknown to mortals. Some man, however,
came by chance that cave within
to the heathen hoard.   In hand he took
a golden goblet, nor gave he it back,
stole with it away, while the watcher slept,
by thievish wiles: for the warden’s wrath
prince and people must pay betimes!
THAT way he went with no will of his own,
in danger of life, to the dragon’s hoard,
but for pressure of peril, some prince’s thane.
He fled in fear the fatal scourge,
seeking shelter, a sinful man,
and entered in. At the awful sight
tottered that guest, and terror seized him;
yet the wretched fugitive rallied anon
from fright and fear ere he fled away,
and took the cup from that treasure-hoard.
Of such besides there was store enough,
heirlooms old, the earth below,
which some earl forgotten, in ancient years,
left the last of his lofty race,
heedfully there had hidden away,
dearest treasure. For death of yore
had hurried all hence; and he alone
left to live, the last of the clan,
weeping his friends, yet wished to bide
warding the treasure, his one delight,
though brief his respite. The barrow, new-ready,
to strand and sea-waves stood anear,
hard by the headland, hidden and closed;
there laid within it his lordly heirlooms
and heaped hoard of heavy gold
that warden of rings. Few words he spake:
“Now hold thou, earth, since heroes may not,
what earls have owned! Lo, erst from thee
brave men brought it! But battle-death seized
and cruel killing my clansmen all,
robbed them of life and a liegeman’s joys.
None have I left to lift the sword,
or to cleanse the carven cup of price,
beaker bright. My brave are gone.
And the helmet hard, all haughty with gold,
shall part from its plating. Polishers sleep
who could brighten and burnish the battle-mask;
and those weeds of war that were wont to brave
over bicker of shields the bite of steel
rust with their bearer. The ringed mail
fares not far with famous chieftain,
at side of hero! No harp’s delight,
no glee-wood’s gladness! No good hawk now
flies through the hall! Nor horses fleet
stamp in the burgstead! Battle and death
the flower of my race have reft away.”
Mournful of mood, thus he moaned his woe,
alone, for them all, and unblithe wept
by day and by night, till death’s fell wave
o’erwhelmed his heart. His hoard-of-bliss
that old ill-doer open found,
who, blazing at twilight the barrows haunteth,
naked foe-dragon flying by night
folded in fire: the folk of earth
dread him sore. ‘Tis his doom to seek
hoard in the graves, and heathen gold
to watch, many-wintered: nor wins he thereby!
Powerful this plague-of-the-people thus
held the house of the hoard in earth
three hundred winters; till One aroused
wrath in his breast, to the ruler bearing
that costly cup, and the king implored
for bond of peace. So the barrow was plundered,
borne off was booty. His boon was granted
that wretched man; and his ruler saw
first time what was fashioned in far-off days.
When the dragon awoke, new woe was kindled.
O’er the stone he snuffed. The stark-heart found
footprint of foe who so far had gone
in his hidden craft by the creature’s head. —
So may the undoomed easily flee
evils and exile, if only he gain
the grace of The Wielder! — That warden of gold
o’er the ground went seeking, greedy to find
the man who wrought him such wrong in sleep.
Savage and burning, the barrow he circled
all without; nor was any there,
none in the waste.... Yet war he desired,
was eager for battle. The barrow he entered,
sought the cup, and discovered soon
that some one of mortals had searched his treasure,
his lordly gold. The guardian waited
ill-enduring till evening came;
boiling with wrath was the barrow’s keeper,
and fain with flame the foe to pay
for the dear cup’s loss. — Now day was fled
as the worm had wished. By its wall no more
was it glad to bide, but burning flew
folded in flame: a fearful beginning
for sons of the soil; and soon it came,
in the doom of their lord, to a dreadful end.
THEN the baleful fiend its fire belched out,
and bright homes burned. The blaze stood high
all landsfolk frighting. No living thing
would that loathly one leave as aloft it flew.
Wide was the dragon’s warring seen,
its fiendish fury far and near,
as the grim destroyer those Geatish people
hated and hounded. To hidden lair,
to its hoard it hastened at hint of dawn.
Folk of the land it had lapped in flame,
with bale and brand. In its barrow it trusted,
its battling and bulwarks: that boast was vain!
To Beowulf then the bale was told
quickly and truly: the king’s own home,
of buildings the best, in brand-waves melted,
that gift-throne of Geats. To the good old man
sad in heart, ‘twas heaviest sorrow.
The sage assumed that his sovran God
he had angered, breaking ancient law,
and embittered the Lord. His breast within
with black thoughts welled, as his wont was never.
The folk’s own fastness that fiery dragon
with flame had destroyed, and the stronghold all
washed by waves; but the warlike king,
prince of the Weders, plotted vengeance.
Warriors’-bulwark, he bade them work
all of iron — the earl’s commander —
a war-shield wondrous: well he knew
that forest-wood against fire were worthless,
linden could aid not. — Atheling brave,
he was fated to finish this fleeting life,   
his days on earth, and the dragon with him,
though long it had watched o’er the wealth of the hoard! —
Shame he reckoned it, sharer-of-rings,
to follow the flyer-afar with a host,
a broad-flung band; nor the battle feared he,
nor deemed he dreadful the dragon’s warring,
its vigor and valor: ventures desperate
he had passed a-plenty, and perils of war,
contest-crash, since, conqueror proud,
Hrothgar’s hall he had wholly purged,
and in grapple had killed the kin of Grendel,
loathsome breed! Not least was that
of hand-to-hand fights where Hygelac fell,
when the ruler of Geats in rush of battle,
lord of his folk, in the Frisian land,
son of Hrethel, by sword-draughts died,
by brands down-beaten. Thence Beowulf fled
through strength of himself and his swimming power,
though alone, and his arms were laden with thirty
coats of mail, when he came to the sea!
Nor yet might Hetwaras   haughtily boast
their craft of contest, who carried against him
shields to the fight: but few escaped
from strife with the hero to seek their homes!
Then swam over ocean Ecgtheow’s son
lonely and sorrowful, seeking his land,
where Hygd made him offer of hoard and realm,
rings and royal-seat, reckoning naught
the strength of her son to save their kingdom
from hostile hordes, after Hygelac’s death.
No sooner for this could the stricken ones
in any wise move that atheling’s mind
over young Heardred’s head as lord
and ruler of all the realm to be:
yet the hero upheld him with helpful words,
aided in honor, till, older grown,
he wielded the Weder-Geats. — Wandering exiles
sought him o’er seas, the sons of Ohtere,
who had spurned the sway of the Scylfings’-helmet,
the bravest and best that broke the rings,
in Swedish land, of the sea-kings’ line,
haughty hero.   Hence Heardred’s end.
For shelter he gave them, sword-death came,
the blade’s fell blow, to bairn of Hygelac;
but the son of Ongentheow sought again
house and home when Heardred fell,
leaving Beowulf lord of Geats
and gift-seat’s master. — A good king he!
THE fall of his lord he was fain to requite
in after days; and to Eadgils he proved
friend to the friendless, and forces sent
over the sea to the son of Ohtere,
weapons and warriors: well repaid he
those care-paths cold when the king he slew.   
Thus safe through struggles the son of Ecgtheow
had passed a plenty, through perils dire,
with daring deeds, till this day was come
that doomed him now with the dragon to strive.
With comrades eleven the lord of Geats
swollen in rage went seeking the dragon.
He had heard whence all the harm arose
and the killing of clansmen; that cup of price
on the lap of the lord had been laid by the finder.
In the throng was this one thirteenth man,
starter of all the strife and ill,
care-laden captive; cringing thence
forced and reluctant, he led them on
till he came in ken of that cavern-hall,
the barrow delved near billowy surges,
flood of ocean. Within ‘twas full
of wire-gold and jewels; a jealous warden,
warrior trusty, the treasures held,
lurked in his lair. Not light the task
of entrance for any of earth-born men!
Sat on the headland the hero king,
spake words of hail to his hearth-companions,
gold-friend of Geats. All gloomy his soul,
wavering, death-bound. Wyrd full nigh
stood ready to greet the gray-haired man,
to seize his soul-hoard, sunder apart
life and body. Not long would be
the warrior’s spirit enwound with flesh.
Beowulf spake, the bairn of Ecgtheow:—
“Through store of struggles I strove in youth,
mighty feuds; I mind them all.
I was seven years old when the sovran of rings,
friend-of-his-folk, from my father took me,
had me, and held me, Hrethel the king,
with food and fee, faithful in kinship.
Ne’er, while I lived there, he loathlier found me,
bairn in the burg, than his birthright sons,
Herebeald and Haethcyn and Hygelac mine.
For the eldest of these, by unmeet chance,
by kinsman’s deed, was the death-bed strewn,
when Haethcyn killed him with horny bow,
his own dear liege laid low with an arrow,
missed the mark and his mate shot down,
one brother the other, with bloody shaft.
A feeless fight,   and a fearful sin,
horror to Hrethel; yet, hard as it was,
unavenged must the atheling die!
Too awful it is for an aged man
to bide and bear, that his bairn so young
rides on the gallows. A rime he makes,
sorrow-song for his son there hanging
as rapture of ravens; no rescue now
can come from the old, disabled man!
Still is he minded, as morning breaks,
of the heir gone elsewhere;   another he hopes not
he will bide to see his burg within
as ward for his wealth, now the one has found
doom of death that the deed incurred.
Forlorn he looks on the lodge of his son,
wine-hall waste and wind-swept chambers
reft of revel. The rider sleepeth,
the hero, far-hidden;   no harp resounds,
in the courts no wassail, as once was heard.
“THEN he goes to his chamber, a grief-song chants
alone for his lost. Too large all seems,
homestead and house. So the helmet-of-Weders
hid in his heart for Herebeald
waves of woe. No way could he take
to avenge on the slayer slaughter so foul;
nor e’en could he harass that hero at all
with loathing deed, though he loved him not.
And so for the sorrow his soul endured,
men’s gladness he gave up and God’s light chose.
Lands and cities he left his sons
(as the wealthy do) when he went from earth.
There was strife and struggle ‘twixt Swede and Geat
o’er the width of waters; war arose,
hard battle-horror, when Hrethel died,
and Ongentheow’s offspring grew
strife-keen, bold, nor brooked o’er the seas
pact of peace, but pushed their hosts
to harass in hatred by Hreosnabeorh.
Men of my folk for that feud had vengeance,
for woful war (‘tis widely known),
though one of them bought it with blood of his heart,
a bargain hard: for Haethcyn proved
fatal that fray, for the first-of-Geats.
At morn, I heard, was the murderer killed
by kinsman for kinsman,   with clash of sword,
when Ongentheow met Eofor there.
Wide split the war-helm: wan he fell,
hoary Scylfing; the hand that smote him
of feud was mindful, nor flinched from the death-blow.
— “For all that he   gave me, my gleaming sword
repaid him at war, — such power I wielded, —
for lordly treasure: with land he entrusted me,
homestead and house. He had no need
from Swedish realm, or from Spear-Dane folk,
or from men of the Gifths, to get him help, —
some warrior worse for wage to buy!
Ever I fought in the front of all,
sole to the fore; and so shall I fight
while I bide in life and this blade shall last
that early and late hath loyal proved
since for my doughtiness Daeghrefn fell,
slain by my hand, the Hugas’ champion.
Nor fared he thence to the Frisian king
with the booty back, and breast-adornments;
but, slain in struggle, that standard-bearer
fell, atheling brave. Not with blade was he slain,
but his bones were broken by brawny gripe,
his heart-waves stilled. — The sword-edge now,
hard blade and my hand, for the hoard shall strive.”
Beowulf spake, and a battle-vow made
his last of all: “I have lived through many
wars in my youth; now once again,
old folk-defender, feud will I seek,
do doughty deeds, if the dark destroyer
forth from his cavern come to fight me!”
Then hailed he the helmeted heroes all,
for the last time greeting his liegemen dear,
comrades of war: “I should carry no weapon,
no sword to the serpent, if sure I knew
how, with such enemy, else my vows
I could gain as I did in Grendel’s day.
But fire in this fight I must fear me now,
and poisonous breath; so I bring with me
breastplate and board.   From the barrow’s keeper
no footbreadth flee I. One fight shall end
our war by the wall, as Wyrd allots,
all mankind’s master. My mood is bold
but forbears to boast o’er this battling-flyer.
— Now abide by the barrow, ye breastplate-mailed,
ye heroes in harness, which of us twain
better from battle-rush bear his wounds.
Wait ye the finish. The fight is not yours,
nor meet for any but me alone
to measure might with this monster here
and play the hero. Hardily I
shall win that wealth, or war shall seize,
cruel killing, your king and lord!”
Up stood then with shield the sturdy champion,
stayed by the strength of his single manhood,
and hardy ‘neath helmet his harness bore
under cleft of the cliffs: no coward’s path!
Soon spied by the wall that warrior chief,
survivor of many a victory-field
where foemen fought with furious clashings,
an arch of stone; and within, a stream
that broke from the barrow. The brooklet’s wave
was hot with fire. The hoard that way
he never could hope unharmed to near,
or endure those deeps,   for the dragon’s flame.
Then let from his breast, for he burst with rage,
the Weder-Geat prince a word outgo;
stormed the stark-heart; stern went ringing
and clear his cry ‘neath the cliff-rocks gray.
The hoard-guard heard a human voice;
his rage was enkindled. No respite now
for pact of peace! The poison-breath
of that foul worm first came forth from the cave,
hot reek-of-fight: the rocks resounded.
Stout by the stone-way his shield he raised,
lord of the Geats, against the loathed-one;
while with courage keen that coiled foe
came seeking strife. The sturdy king
had drawn his sword, not dull of edge,
heirloom old; and each of the two
felt fear of his foe, though fierce their mood.
Stoutly stood with his shield high-raised
the warrior king, as the worm now coiled
together amain: the mailed-one waited.
Now, spire by spire, fast sped and glided
that blazing serpent. The shield protected,
soul and body a shorter while
for the hero-king than his heart desired,
could his will have wielded the welcome respite
but once in his life! But Wyrd denied it,
and victory’s honors. — His arm he lifted
lord of the Geats, the grim foe smote
with atheling’s heirloom. Its edge was turned
brown blade, on the bone, and bit more feebly
than its noble master had need of then
in his baleful stress. — Then the barrow’s keeper
waxed full wild for that weighty blow,
cast deadly flames; wide drove and far
those vicious fires. No victor’s glory
the Geats’ lord boasted; his brand had failed,
naked in battle, as never it should,
excellent iron! — ‘Twas no easy path
that Ecgtheow’s honored heir must tread
over the plain to the place of the foe;
for against his will he must win a home
elsewhere far, as must all men, leaving
this lapsing life! — Not long it was
ere those champions grimly closed again.
The hoard-guard was heartened; high heaved his breast
once more; and by peril was pressed again,
enfolded in flames, the folk-commander!
Nor yet about him his band of comrades,
sons of athelings, armed stood
with warlike front: to the woods they bent them,
their lives to save. But the soul of one
with care was cumbered. Kinship true
can never be marred in a noble mind!
WIGLAF his name was, Weohstan’s son,
linden-thane loved, the lord of Scylfings,
Aelfhere’s kinsman. His king he now saw
with heat under helmet hard oppressed.
He minded the prizes his prince had given him,
wealthy seat of the Waegmunding line,
and folk-rights that his father owned
Not long he lingered. The linden yellow,
his shield, he seized; the old sword he drew: —
as heirloom of Eanmund earth-dwellers knew it,
who was slain by the sword-edge, son of Ohtere,
friendless exile, erst in fray
killed by Weohstan, who won for his kin
brown-bright helmet, breastplate ringed,
old sword of Eotens, Onela’s gift,
weeds of war of the warrior-thane,
battle-gear brave: though a brother’s child
had been felled, the feud was unfelt by Onela.   
For winters this war-gear Weohstan kept,
breastplate and board, till his bairn had grown
earlship to earn as the old sire did:
then he gave him, mid Geats, the gear of battle,
portion huge, when he passed from life,
fared aged forth. For the first time now
with his leader-lord the liegeman young
was bidden to share the shock of battle.
Neither softened his soul, nor the sire’s bequest
weakened in war.   So the worm found out
when once in fight the foes had met!
Wiglaf spake, — and his words were sage;
sad in spirit, he said to his comrades:—
“I remember the time, when mead we took,
what promise we made to this prince of ours
in the banquet-hall, to our breaker-of-rings,
for gear of combat to give him requital,
for hard-sword and helmet, if hap should bring
stress of this sort! Himself who chose us
from all his army to aid him now,
urged us to glory, and gave these treasures,
because he counted us keen with the spear
and hardy ‘neath helm, though this hero-work
our leader hoped unhelped and alone
to finish for us, — folk-defender
who hath got him glory greater than all men
for daring deeds! Now the day is come
that our noble master has need of the might
of warriors stout. Let us stride along
the hero to help while the heat is about him
glowing and grim! For God is my witness
I am far more fain the fire should seize
along with my lord these limbs of mine!   
Unsuiting it seems our shields to bear
homeward hence, save here we essay
to fell the foe and defend the life
of the Weders’ lord. I wot ‘twere shame
on the law of our land if alone the king
out of Geatish warriors woe endured
and sank in the struggle! My sword and helmet,
breastplate and board, for us both shall serve!”
Through slaughter-reek strode he to succor his chieftain,
his battle-helm bore, and brief words spake:—
“Beowulf dearest, do all bravely,
as in youthful days of yore thou vowedst
that while life should last thou wouldst let no wise
thy glory droop! Now, great in deeds,
atheling steadfast, with all thy strength
shield thy life! I will stand to help thee.”
At the words the worm came once again,
murderous monster mad with rage,
with fire-billows flaming, its foes to seek,
the hated men. In heat-waves burned
that board   to the boss, and the breastplate failed
to shelter at all the spear-thane young.
Yet quickly under his kinsman’s shield
went eager the earl, since his own was now
all burned by the blaze. The bold king again
had mind of his glory: with might his glaive
was driven into the dragon’s head, —
blow nerved by hate. But Naegling   was shivered,
broken in battle was Beowulf’s sword,
old and gray. ‘Twas granted him not
that ever the edge of iron at all
could help him at strife: too strong was his hand,
so the tale is told, and he tried too far
with strength of stroke all swords he wielded,
though sturdy their steel: they steaded him nought.
Then for the third time thought on its feud
that folk-destroyer, fire-dread dragon,
and rushed on the hero, where room allowed,
battle-grim, burning; its bitter teeth
closed on his neck, and covered him
with waves of blood from his breast that welled.
‘TWAS now, men say, in his sovran’s need
that the earl made known his noble strain,
craft and keenness and courage enduring.
Heedless of harm, though his hand was burned,
hardy-hearted, he helped his kinsman.
A little lower the loathsome beast
he smote with sword; his steel drove in
bright and burnished; that blaze began
to lose and lessen. At last the king
wielded his wits again, war-knife drew,
a biting blade by his breastplate hanging,
and the Weders’-helm smote that worm asunder,
felled the foe, flung forth its life.
So had they killed it, kinsmen both,
athelings twain: thus an earl should be
in danger’s day! — Of deeds of valor
this conqueror’s-hour of the king was last,
of his work in the world. The wound began,
which that dragon-of-earth had erst inflicted,
to swell and smart; and soon he found
in his breast was boiling, baleful and deep,
pain of poison. The prince walked on,
wise in his thought, to the wall of rock;
then sat, and stared at the structure of giants,
where arch of stone and steadfast column
upheld forever that hall in earth.
Yet here must the hand of the henchman peerless
lave with water his winsome lord,
the king and conqueror covered with blood,
with struggle spent, and unspan his helmet.
Beowulf spake in spite of his hurt,
his mortal wound; full well he knew
his portion now was past and gone
of earthly bliss, and all had fled
of his file of days, and death was near:
“I would fain bestow on son of mine
this gear of war, were given me now
that any heir should after me come
of my proper blood. This people I ruled
fifty winters. No folk-king was there,
none at all, of the neighboring clans
who war would wage me with ‘warriors’-friends’   
and threat me with horrors. At home I bided
what fate might come, and I cared for mine own;
feuds I sought not, nor falsely swore
ever on oath. For all these things,
though fatally wounded, fain am I!
From the Ruler-of-Man no wrath shall seize me,
when life from my frame must flee away,
for killing of kinsmen! Now quickly go
and gaze on that hoard ‘neath the hoary rock,
Wiglaf loved, now the worm lies low,
sleeps, heart-sore, of his spoil bereaved.
And fare in haste. I would fain behold
the gorgeous heirlooms, golden store,
have joy in the jewels and gems, lay down
softlier for sight of this splendid hoard
my life and the lordship I long have held.”
I HAVE heard that swiftly the son of Weohstan
at wish and word of his wounded king, —
war-sick warrior, — woven mail-coat,
battle-sark, bore ‘neath the barrow’s roof.
Then the clansman keen, of conquest proud,
passing the seat,   saw store of jewels
and glistening gold the ground along;
by the wall were marvels, and many a vessel
in the den of the dragon, the dawn-flier old:
unburnished bowls of bygone men
reft of richness; rusty helms
of the olden age; and arm-rings many
wondrously woven. — Such wealth of gold,
booty from barrow, can burden with pride
each human wight: let him hide it who will! —
His glance too fell on a gold-wove banner
high o’er the hoard, of handiwork noblest,
brilliantly broidered; so bright its gleam,
all the earth-floor he easily saw
and viewed all these vessels. No vestige now
was seen of the serpent: the sword had ta’en him.
Then, I heard, the hill of its hoard was reft,
old work of giants, by one alone;
he burdened his bosom with beakers and plate
at his own good will, and the ensign took,
brightest of beacons. — The blade of his lord
— its edge was iron — had injured deep
one that guarded the golden hoard
many a year and its murder-fire
spread hot round the barrow in horror-billows
at midnight hour, till it met its doom.
Hasted the herald, the hoard so spurred him
his track to retrace; he was troubled by doubt,
high-souled hero, if haply he’d find
alive, where he left him, the lord of Weders,
weakening fast by the wall of the cave.
So he carried the load. His lord and king
he found all bleeding, famous chief
at the lapse of life. The liegeman again
plashed him with water, till point of word
broke through the breast-hoard. Beowulf spake,
sage and sad, as he stared at the gold. —
“For the gold and treasure, to God my thanks,
to the Wielder-of-Wonders, with words I say,
for what I behold, to Heaven’s Lord,
for the grace that I give such gifts to my folk
or ever the day of my death be run!
Now I’ve bartered here for booty of treasure
the last of my life, so look ye well
to the needs of my land! No longer I tarry.
A barrow bid ye the battle-fanned raise
for my ashes. ‘Twill shine by the shore of the flood,
to folk of mine memorial fair
on Hrones Headland high uplifted,
that ocean-wanderers oft may hail
Beowulf’s Barrow, as back from far
they drive their keels o’er the darkling wave.”
From his neck he unclasped the collar of gold,
valorous king, to his vassal gave it
with bright-gold helmet, breastplate, and ring,
to the youthful thane: bade him use them in joy.
“Thou art end and remnant of all our race
the Waegmunding name. For Wyrd hath swept them,
all my line, to the land of doom,
earls in their glory: I after them go.”
This word was the last which the wise old man
harbored in heart ere hot death-waves
of balefire he chose. From his bosom fled
his soul to seek the saints’ reward.
IT was heavy hap for that hero young
on his lord beloved to look and find him
lying on earth with life at end,
sorrowful sight. But the slayer too,
awful earth-dragon, empty of breath,
lay felled in fight, nor, fain of its treasure,
could the writhing monster rule it more.
For edges of iron had ended its days,
hard and battle-sharp, hammers’ leaving;   
and that flier-afar had fallen to ground
hushed by its hurt, its hoard all near,
no longer lusty aloft to whirl
at midnight, making its merriment seen,
proud of its prizes: prone it sank
by the handiwork of the hero-king.
Forsooth among folk but few achieve,
— though sturdy and strong, as stories tell me,
and never so daring in deed of valor, —
the perilous breath of a poison-foe
to brave, and to rush on the ring-board hall,
whenever his watch the warden keeps
bold in the barrow. Beowulf paid
the price of death for that precious hoard;
and each of the foes had found the end
of this fleeting life. Befell erelong
that the laggards in war the wood had left,
trothbreakers, cowards, ten together,
fearing before to flourish a spear
in the sore distress of their sovran lord.
Now in their shame their shields they carried,
armor of fight, where the old man lay;
and they gazed on Wiglaf. Wearied he sat
at his sovran’s shoulder, shieldsman good,
to wake him with water.   Nowise it availed.
Though well he wished it, in world no more
could he barrier life for that leader-of-battles
nor baffle the will of all-wielding God.
Doom of the Lord was law o’er the deeds
of every man, as it is to-day.
Grim was the answer, easy to get,
from the youth for those that had yielded to fear!
Wiglaf spake, the son of Weohstan, —
mournful he looked on those men unloved:—
“Who sooth will speak, can say indeed
that the ruler who gave you golden rings
and the harness of war in which ye stand
— for he at ale-bench often-times
bestowed on hall-folk helm and breastplate,
lord to liegemen, the likeliest gear
which near of far he could find to give, —
threw away and wasted these weeds of battle,
on men who failed when the foemen came!
Not at all could the king of his comrades-in-arms
venture to vaunt, though the Victory-Wielder,
God, gave him grace that he got revenge
sole with his sword in stress and need.
To rescue his life, ‘twas little that I
could serve him in struggle; yet shift I made
(hopeless it seemed) to help my kinsman.
Its strength ever waned, when with weapon I struck
that fatal foe, and the fire less strongly
flowed from its head. — Too few the heroes
in throe of contest that thronged to our king!
Now gift of treasure and girding of sword,
joy of the house and home-delight
shall fail your folk; his freehold-land
every clansman within your kin
shall lose and leave, when lords highborn
hear afar of that flight of yours,
a fameless deed. Yea, death is better
for liegemen all than a life of shame!”
THAT battle-toil bade he at burg to announce,
at the fort on the cliff, where, full of sorrow,
all the morning earls had sat,
daring shieldsmen, in doubt of twain:
would they wail as dead, or welcome home,
their lord beloved? Little   kept back
of the tidings new, but told them all,
the herald that up the headland rode. —
“Now the willing-giver to Weder folk
in death-bed lies; the Lord of Geats
on the slaughter-bed sleeps by the serpent’s deed!
And beside him is stretched that slayer-of-men
with knife-wounds sick:   no sword availed
on the awesome thing in any wise
to work a wound. There Wiglaf sitteth,
Weohstan’s bairn, by Beowulf’s side,
the living earl by the other dead,
and heavy of heart a head-watch   keeps
o’er friend and foe. — Now our folk may look
for waging of war when once unhidden
to Frisian and Frank the fall of the king
is spread afar. — The strife began
when hot on the Hugas   Hygelac fell
and fared with his fleet to the Frisian land.
Him there the Hetwaras humbled in war,
plied with such prowess their power o’erwhelming
that the bold-in-battle bowed beneath it
and fell in fight. To his friends no wise
could that earl give treasure! And ever since
the Merowings’ favor has failed us wholly.
Nor aught expect I of peace and faith
from Swedish folk. ‘Twas spread afar
how Ongentheow reft at Ravenswood
Haethcyn Hrethling of hope and life,
when the folk of Geats for the first time sought
in wanton pride the Warlike-Scylfings.
Soon the sage old sire   of Ohtere,
ancient and awful, gave answering blow;
the sea-king   he slew, and his spouse redeemed,
his good wife rescued, though robbed of her gold,
mother of Ohtere and Onela.
Then he followed his foes, who fled before him
sore beset and stole their way,
bereft of a ruler, to Ravenswood.
With his host he besieged there what swords had left,
the weary and wounded; woes he threatened
the whole night through to that hard-pressed throng:
some with the morrow his sword should kill,
some should go to the gallows-tree
for rapture of ravens. But rescue came
with dawn of day for those desperate men
when they heard the horn of Hygelac sound,
tones of his trumpet; the trusty king
had followed their trail with faithful band.
THE bloody swath of Swedes and Geats
and the storm of their strife, were seen afar,
how folk against folk the fight had wakened.
The ancient king with his atheling band
sought his citadel, sorrowing much:
Ongentheow earl went up to his burg.
He had tested Hygelac’s hardihood,
the proud one’s prowess, would prove it no longer,
defied no more those fighting-wanderers
nor hoped from the seamen to save his hoard,
his bairn and his bride: so he bent him again,
old, to his earth-walls. Yet after him came
with slaughter for Swedes the standards of Hygelac
o’er peaceful plains in pride advancing,
till Hrethelings fought in the fenced town.   
Then Ongentheow with edge of sword,
the hoary-bearded, was held at bay,
and the folk-king there was forced to suffer
Eofor’s anger. In ire, at the king
Wulf Wonreding with weapon struck;
and the chieftain’s blood, for that blow, in streams
flowed ‘neath his hair. No fear felt he,
stout old Scylfing, but straightway repaid
in better bargain that bitter stroke
and faced his foe with fell intent.
Nor swift enough was the son of Wonred
answer to render the aged chief;
too soon on his head the helm was cloven;
blood-bedecked he bowed to earth,
and fell adown; not doomed was he yet,
and well he waxed, though the wound was sore.
Then the hardy Hygelac-thane,   
when his brother fell, with broad brand smote,
giants’ sword crashing through giants’-helm
across the shield-wall: sank the king,
his folk’s old herdsman, fatally hurt.
There were many to bind the brother’s wounds
and lift him, fast as fate allowed
his people to wield the place-of-war.
But Eofor took from Ongentheow,
earl from other, the iron-breastplate,
hard sword hilted, and helmet too,
and the hoar-chief’s harness to Hygelac carried,
who took the trappings, and truly promised
rich fee ‘mid folk, — and fulfilled it so.
For that grim strife gave the Geatish lord,
Hrethel’s offspring, when home he came,
to Eofor and Wulf a wealth of treasure,
Each of them had a hundred thousand   
in land and linked rings; nor at less price reckoned
mid-earth men such mighty deeds!
And to Eofor he gave his only daughter
in pledge of grace, the pride of his home.
“Such is the feud, the foeman’s rage,
death-hate of men: so I deem it sure
that the Swedish folk will seek us home
for this fall of their friends, the fighting-Scylfings,
when once they learn that our warrior leader
lifeless lies, who land and hoard
ever defended from all his foes,
furthered his folk’s weal, finished his course
a hardy hero. — Now haste is best,
that we go to gaze on our Geatish lord,
and bear the bountiful breaker-of-rings
to the funeral pyre. No fragments merely
shall burn with the warrior. Wealth of jewels,
gold untold and gained in terror,
treasure at last with his life obtained,
all of that booty the brands shall take,
fire shall eat it. No earl must carry
memorial jewel. No maiden fair
shall wreathe her neck with noble ring:
nay, sad in spirit and shorn of her gold,
oft shall she pass o’er paths of exile
now our lord all laughter has laid aside,
all mirth and revel. Many a spear
morning-cold shall be clasped amain,
lifted aloft; nor shall lilt of harp
those warriors wake; but the wan-hued raven,
fain o’er the fallen, his feast shall praise
and boast to the eagle how bravely he ate
when he and the wolf were wasting the slain.”
So he told his sorrowful tidings,
and little   he lied, the loyal man
of word or of work. The warriors rose;
sad, they climbed to the Cliff-of-Eagles,
went, welling with tears, the wonder to view.
Found on the sand there, stretched at rest,
their lifeless lord, who had lavished rings
of old upon them. Ending-day
had dawned on the doughty-one; death had seized
in woful slaughter the Weders’ king.
There saw they, besides, the strangest being,
loathsome, lying their leader near,
prone on the field. The fiery dragon,
fearful fiend, with flame was scorched.
Reckoned by feet, it was fifty measures
in length as it lay. Aloft erewhile
it had revelled by night, and anon come back,
seeking its den; now in death’s sure clutch
it had come to the end of its earth-hall joys.
By it there stood the stoups and jars;
dishes lay there, and dear-decked swords
eaten with rust, as, on earth’s lap resting,
a thousand winters they waited there.
For all that heritage huge, that gold
of bygone men, was bound by a spell,   
so the treasure-hall could be touched by none
of human kind, — save that Heaven’s King,
God himself, might give whom he would,
Helper of Heroes, the hoard to open, —
even such a man as seemed to him meet.
A PERILOUS path, it proved, he   trod
who heinously hid, that hall within,
wealth under wall! Its watcher had killed
one of a few,   and the feud was avenged
in woful fashion. Wondrous seems it,
what manner a man of might and valor
oft ends his life, when the earl no longer
in mead-hall may live with loving friends.
So Beowulf, when that barrow’s warden
he sought, and the struggle; himself knew not
in what wise he should wend from the world at last.
For   princes potent, who placed the gold,
with a curse to doomsday covered it deep,
so that marked with sin the man should be,
hedged with horrors, in hell-bonds fast,
racked with plagues, who should rob their hoard.
Yet no greed for gold, but the grace of heaven,
ever the king had kept in view.   
Wiglaf spake, the son of Weohstan:—
“At the mandate of one, oft warriors many
sorrow must suffer; and so must we.
The people’s-shepherd showed not aught
of care for our counsel, king beloved!
That guardian of gold he should grapple not, urged we,
but let him lie where he long had been
in his earth-hall waiting the end of the world,
the hest of heaven. — This hoard is ours
but grievously gotten; too grim the fate
which thither carried our king and lord.
I was within there, and all I viewed,
the chambered treasure, when chance allowed me
(and my path was made in no pleasant wise)
under the earth-wall. Eager, I seized
such heap from the hoard as hands could bear
and hurriedly carried it hither back
to my liege and lord. Alive was he still,
still wielding his wits. The wise old man
spake much in his sorrow, and sent you greetings
and bade that ye build, when he breathed no more,
on the place of his balefire a barrow high,
memorial mighty. Of men was he
worthiest warrior wide earth o’er
the while he had joy of his jewels and burg.
Let us set out in haste now, the second time
to see and search this store of treasure,
these wall-hid wonders, — the way I show you, —
where, gathered near, ye may gaze your fill
at broad-gold and rings. Let the bier, soon made,
be all in order when out we come,
our king and captain to carry thither
— man beloved — where long he shall bide
safe in the shelter of sovran God.”
Then the bairn of Weohstan bade command,
hardy chief, to heroes many
that owned their homesteads, hither to bring
firewood from far — o’er the folk they ruled —
for the famed-one’s funeral. “ Fire shall devour
and wan flames feed on the fearless warrior
who oft stood stout in the iron-shower,
when, sped from the string, a storm of arrows
shot o’er the shield-wall: the shaft held firm,
featly feathered, followed the barb.”
And now the sage young son of Weohstan
seven chose of the chieftain’s thanes,
the best he found that band within,
and went with these warriors, one of eight,
under hostile roof. In hand one bore
a lighted torch and led the way.
No lots they cast for keeping the hoard
when once the warriors saw it in hall,
altogether without a guardian,
lying there lost. And little they mourned
when they had hastily haled it out,
dear-bought treasure! The dragon they cast,
the worm, o’er the wall for the wave to take,
and surges swallowed that shepherd of gems.
Then the woven gold on a wain was laden —
countless quite! — and the king was borne,
hoary hero, to Hrones-Ness.
THEN fashioned for him the folk of Geats
firm on the earth a funeral-pile,
and hung it with helmets and harness of war
and breastplates bright, as the boon he asked;
and they laid amid it the mighty chieftain,
heroes mourning their master dear.
Then on the hill that hugest of balefires
the warriors wakened. Wood-smoke rose
black over blaze, and blent was the roar
of flame with weeping (the wind was still),
till the fire had broken the frame of bones,
hot at the heart. In heavy mood
their misery moaned they, their master’s death.
Wailing her woe, the widow   old,
her hair upbound, for Beowulf’s death
sung in her sorrow, and said full oft
she dreaded the doleful days to come,
deaths enow, and doom of battle,
and shame. — The smoke by the sky was devoured.
The folk of the Weders fashioned there
on the headland a barrow broad and high,
by ocean-farers far descried:
in ten days’ time their toil had raised it,
the battle-brave’s beacon. Round brands of the pyre
a wall they built, the worthiest ever
that wit could prompt in their wisest men.
They placed in the barrow that precious booty,
the rounds and the rings they had reft erewhile,
hardy heroes, from hoard in cave, —
trusting the ground with treasure of earls,
gold in the earth, where ever it lies
useless to men as of yore it was.
Then about that barrow the battle-keen rode,
atheling-born, a band of twelve,
lament to make, to mourn their king,
chant their dirge, and their chieftain honor.
They praised his earlship, his acts of prowess
worthily witnessed: and well it is
that men their master-friend mightily laud,
heartily love, when hence he goes
from life in the body forlorn away.
Thus made their mourning the men of Geatland,
for their hero’s passing his hearth-companions:
quoth that of all the kings of earth,
of men he was mildest and most beloved,
to his kin the kindest, keenest for praise